Title: A Minimally Invasiveness Hybrid Brain-Computer Interface: A Distributed, Scalable and Evolvable Architecture for Whole Brain Access

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 31

Markdown Content:
1

# A Minimally Invasiveness Hybrid Brain -Computer Interface :

# A Distributed , Scalabl e and Evol vab le Architecture for Whole Brain Access 

Zhe Li *1, Na Liu 1, Li Wan 2, Meng ting Liu 1, Chenguang Wu 2 

> 1

School of Biomedical Engineering, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat -Sen University, Shenzhen 

518107, China  

> 2

Shenzhen BrainXess Technology Co., Ltd., Shenzhen 518100, China 

*Corresponding author : Dr. Zhe Li, zheli05@hotmail.com 

Abstract . Brain -computer interfaces face a fundamental trade -off between the signal fidelity and 

stimulation precision of nonin vasive systems and the surgical burden and scalability of invasive systems. 

Non -invasive BCIs suffer from low signal quality and poor stimulation accuracy due to the skull barrier 

and the variability introduced by the scalp and skull. Existing invasive BCIs rely on traumatic surgical 

procedures or brain -penetrating electrodes, which limit s their spatial extensibility, application, and 

patient accept ance . Here, we introduce a minimally invasive hybrid BCI architecture that uses the skull 

as a distributed interface layer rather than treating it solely as a barrier. The hybrid BCI comprises four 

integrated components : (1) the safe and smart micro -hole craniotomy ; (2) distributed microelectrodes 

subcutaneously implanted in micro -hole s in the skull with the distal end in contact with the dura; (3) an

external bi -directional wearable headset for coupling, recording, stimulation, and channel selection; and 

(4) an AI -assisted planning and control agent . Animal studies have shown that micro -holes with a 

diameter of 300 -800 μm can be safely and conveniently prepared at any predefined locations across the 

skull without impairing the dura. In vivo experiments on rats demonstrate that the hybrid BCI with 

skull -implanted microelectrodes evidently increase s resting -state spectral power and improve s the 

signal -to -noise rati o of somatosensory and steady -state visual evoked responses compared to the scalp 

EEG ; the computational modelling show s that distributed skull -dura micro electrodes can increase the 

intracranial electrical field strength and steer focused temporal -interference fields toward s predefined 

deep brain targets. These findings will lay a solid foundation for future endeavors in wireless integration ,

safety evaluation and clinical benefit s of the hybrid BCI . In summary, we propose the hybrid BCI as a 

distinct minimally invasive BCI paradigm with the great potential as a distributed, scalable , and 

upgradable neural interface that can expand the clinical application of minimally invasive BCI 

techniques. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 2

1. Introduction 

Brain -computer interfaces (BCIs) establish a direct functional link between neural activity and 

external devices. They can record neural signals ( “read ”), deliver electrical, optical, or acoustic energy 

(“write ”), or combine these operations i n a closed loop, with applications in communication, motor and 

sensory restoration, neurorehabilitation, and neuromodulation . The central translational challenge is not 

simply to maximize signal quality or minimize invasiveness in isolation, but to achieve a clinically 

acceptable balance among information fidelity, procedural burden, chronic stability, spatial coverage, 

and system upgradability. 

Clinical BCI technologies span a continuum of invasiveness. In March 2026 , China’s National 

Medical Products Administration approved NEO , an epidural implantable BCI for upper -limb motor 

rehabilitation, marking an important regulatory milestone for semi -invasive BCI translation. Other 

approaches include subdural cortical arrays, endovascular electrodes, and intracortical microelectrode 

arrays. These systems can provide high -fidelity neural access than the scalp EEG, but their broader use 

is constrained by the surgical burden, chronic interface stability, device explantation or revision 

requirements, and t he difficulty of extending interfaces across multiple brain regions. 

Experience with other implanted neurotechnologies illustrates that technical eligibility does not 

guarantee clinical uptake. In deep brain stimulation (DBS), only a minority of patients with Parkinson’s 

disease (1.6% to 4.5% ) meet the eligibility criteria for DBS 1; and many eligible patients (up to 60 -70%) 

decline surgery 2,3, due to the f ear of surgery 4, uncertain benefits 5, or concerns of recovery 5. Similarly ,

cochlear implantation remains underused among eligible adults. T he global acceptance of cochlear 

implant is only about 10% 6,7; even in high -income countries, its acceptance rate is still below 20% 8.

Although these technologies are not equivalent to BCI, they highlight how procedural burden, risk -

benefit uncertainty, and patient preference can limit adoption of implanted neural devices. A scalable 

BCI platform must therefore address both neural perform ance and long -term usability. 

Non -invasive BCIs use scalp -mounted wearable sensors and offer ease of deployment. However, 

the skull attenuates, filters, and spatially smooths electrical potentials measured at the scalp 9-11 . These 

effects arise from the skull’s relatively low 12  and frequency -dependent conductivity 13 , heterogeneous 

microstructure 14 , and variable thickness 15 . For instance, the electrical conductivity of skull is only ~20 

mS/m ; in comparison, the electrical conductivity for scalp is 410 mS/m 12 . Motion, muscle activity, 

electrode -skin imped ance, and placement variability further reduce inter -session consistency. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 3

Advanced signal -processing and artificial intelligence methods can improve denoising and neural 

decoding; however, they cannot fully recover spatial and physiological information that is not captured 

at the sensor level. 

The s kull also constraints precise transcranial neuromodulation 16 . In transcranial electrical 

stimulation, due to the “shunt effect”, a substantial fraction of the applied current is shunted through the 

scalp and skull, reducing intracranial field strength, and limiting the focality. It was reported that only 

~10% of stimulation current applied on the scalp act ually enter ed t he brain 17 , making it difficult to 

stimulate specific brain regions via non -invasive strategies . Temporal -interference stimulation offers a 

potential route to stimulate deep brain targets, but targeting remains sensitive to tissue heterogeneity, 

electrode placement, and safety -limited current amplitudes 18 . Ultrasound and optical neuromodulation 

use different propagation mechanisms, yet they also require accurate modeling and control of energy 

transmission through heterogeneous cranial tissues 19 ,20 .

These limitations motivate an interface that approaches the dura without penetrating the dura or 

the brain tissue and that keeps the progressively evolving electronic system outside the body. A skull -

based micro -interface could reduce the impedance and spatial uncertainty introduced by the skull while 

avoiding conventional craniotomy and intracranial leads. However, this concept requires a reproduci ble 

method for creating micro -channels through the hard skull without impairing the underlying dura, a 

stable and biocompatible electrode -dura interface, and a reliable external coupling architecture. 

Existing mechanical and laser -based approaches can cre ate small cranial openings, but endpoint 

control, thermal injury, and selective dura protection remain important engineering challenge s. Owing 

to the high -strength skull 21 ,22  and the complex brain -dura interface 23 ,24 , it is hard to achieve safe micro -

hole craniotomy with existing material removal techniques such as mechanical drilling 25 ,26  or laser 

drilling 27 ,28 . Use of a micro -drill bit would result in a high probability of tool fracture ; a rotating micro -

drill bit would also damage dura. As for micro -hole craniotomy by laser machining , presence of blood 

or tissue fluid will disturb the optical coherence tomography (OCT) signals for real -time depth control ,

making the cutting through detection method unreliable. In the in vivo test performed by researchers 

from Medical University of Vienna 29 , dura or even cortex damage was hard to avoid in robot -driven 

laser beam craniotomy, owing to the uncertainty in identifying the end point of craniotomy .

Here , we propose the minimally invasive hybrid BCI architecture based on four integrated 

elements , including (1) the acupuncture -like safe and smart micro -hole craniotomy, (2) distributed 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 4

microelectrodes implanted in micro -holes at predefined positions in the skull, with the distal electrode 

in contact with the dura and the proximal end beneath the scalp , (3) an exte rnal bidirectional wearable 

headpiece for signal acquisition, stimulation, channel selection, and power or data coupling; and ( 4) an 

AI -assisted planning and control agent for electrode implantation planning, signal decoding, electric -

field optimization, a nd fu ture closed -loop control of the hybrid BCI . In this context, the “hybrid” refers 

to the functional coupling between the chronically implanted distributed microelectrodes with the 

external wearable and upgradable electronics. 

The present study evaluates three enabling technical layers of this architecture. First, we 

characterize the mechani sm , thermal control, and endpoint detection of the ultrasonic micro -hole 

craniotomy. Second, we test whether skull -implanted microelectrodes improve resting and evoked 

neural signal recordings in comparison with the c onventional scalp EEG. Third, we use computational 

modeling to examine whether distributed skull -dura micro electrodes can increase intracranial field 

strength and focality, and st eer temporal -interference fields toward cortical and deep brain targets. The 

study does not yet demonstrate a fully integrated wireless, chronic, or closed -loop human system; rather, 

it establishes fundamental cornerstones of the hybrid BCI by verifying th e feasibility of the micro -

intervention access, high -fidelity recording, and field -shaping principles. Conceptually, the architecture 

occupies a distinct design space between scalp -based noninvasive BCIs and intracranial invasive BCIs 

and will enable distr ibuted, incrementally expandable neural interface for w hole brain access .

2. Results 

The u ltra -minimally invasive micro -hole craniotomy technique and device 

We have developed a technique for the safe and smart micro -hole craniotomy (S 2MHC) without material 

removal , for the implementation of minimally invasive hybrid BCI via micro -intervention. This 

technique was proposed by Dr. Zhe Li around 2015 for the first time. In this study, it has been pushed 

to a mature state for clinical application. Exploiting the unique structural (e.g., the porous architecture) 

and material (e.g., organic and inorganic compositions) properties of the skull , this technique utilizes 

high -amplitude ultrasonic vibration to locally deform bio -composite’s microporous architecture, 

achieving safe, smart, high -quality and low -force (< 500 mN) micro -hole craniotomy (diameter: 300 -

800 μ m) on the high -strength skull with minimal thermal effect (maximum temperature < 42 ℃; 

postoperative hea ling in 2 weeks) , in a convenient and minimally invasive manner similar to 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 5

subcutaneous injection on the skin. Micro -tunnels generated at pre -defined locations across the skull 

would function as micro -I/O ports for communicating with the brain. Implanting microelectrodes into 

the brain and using a wearable headset coupled with these micro -implants, a hybrid BCI could be 

established for acquiring high -quality neural signal or precise neural stimulation (Fig. 1 a).

For this purpose, we have developed a smart micro -hole craniotomy device, consisting of an 

ultrasonic end -effector and a workstation (Fig. 1 b). The end -effector can be mounted onto a robotic arm 

for micro -hole craniotomy across the whole skull along a pre -planned trajectory . Multifaceted 

challenges in areas including device development , micro -hole craniotomy mechanism and performance, 

thermal necrosis management, and termination detection at the irregular skull -dura interface are 

effectively addressed through a holistic appr oach. With these endeavors, high -quality micro -holes could 

be precisely generated on the skull. Fig. 1 c-e demonstrates the generation of an array of micro -holes 

(diameter: 500 μm) at an interval of 800 μm through a minimally invasive process without material 

removal (see the simulation results in Fig. 1 f). 

Figure 1. The micro -hole craniotomy technique and device . (a) The technical pipe -line of micro -

hole craniotomy, micro -intervention, and the minimally invasive hybrid BCI. Through micro -I/O ports 

prepared on the skull, micro -intervention can be conveniently performed by implanting microelectrode 

into these micro -holes, generating a minimally invasive passage for the hybrid BCI . ( b) The micro -ho le 

craniotomy device, consisting of an ultrasonic end -effector and a workstation; an interchangeable 

micro -tool is mounted on the end -effector for micro -hole craniotomy without material removal . (c)

Micro -hole craniotomy performed at an anesthetized New Ze aland white rabbit. The ultrasonic 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 6

vibration assisted micro -hole craniotomy method, or Lee’s m icro -hole craniotomy , first proposed by Dr. 

Zhe Li around 2015 . (d) The optical and SEM mages showing the high -quality micro -hole generated in 

the skull in (c). ( e) Scanning electron microscopic (SEM) image showing micro -hole s with a diameter 

of 500 μm diameter can be densely created in the skull at an interval less than 1 mm . Scale bar in d-e:

200 μ m. (f) Simulation of the ultrasonic vibration assisted micro -hole forming process without material 

removal using the smooth particle hydrodynamics method; A and B are two representative bone tissue 

particles, while A’ and B’ are their corresponding position in the micro -hole craniotomy process. 

Acupuncture -like micro -hole craniotomy with minimal thermal effects 

The mechanism of ultrasonic vibration assisted micro -hole craniotomy was investigated with 

simulation ( using the smooth particle hydrodynamics method 30 ,31 , Fig. 2 a) and finite -depth craniotomy 

tests on freshly harvested skull bone from rabbits (by advancing the ultrasonic micro -tool to a prescribed 

depth h and then withdraw ; Fig. 2 b). Upon tool -bone contact, t he ultrasonic micro -tool would 

microscopically damage bone tissue ( see bone tissue debris in the “crater” in Fig. 2 b at a feed depth of 

h = 100 μm). A long with tool feeding, high frequency hammering of the ultrasonic tool would 

repeatedly “forge” fractured bone debris (see the smooth inner surface at h = 200 μm in Fig. 2 b); skull 

bone’s micro -porous architecture would be plastically deform ed and squeeze d sidewards around the 

conical tip , creating a high -quality micro -hole (good circularity and smooth inner surface ) in the high -

strength skull bone without material removal (h = 400 μm in Fig. 2 b). In the micro -hole craniotomy 

process, a layer of dense ly compacted bone tissue was plastically formed around the micro -hole .

Performance of the micro -hole craniotomy technique was further evaluated. T he micro -hole 

craniotomy force can be as low as ~ 500 mN, which is even smaller than the force for subcutaneous 

injection on soft tissue (Fig. 2 c), despite the significant difference in elastic modulus between skull and 

skin (skull bone’s Young’s modulus is 4 orders of magnitude higher than skin 32 ). In the control group 

without ultrasonic vibration, the micro -tool could be forced into skull bone, but resulting in a 

significantly large force, deteriorated hole morphology and unpredictable tool fracture, which is 

disastrous and unacceptable in clinical applications. 

The ultrasonic micro -hole craniotomy technique is extremely safe at the skull -dura interface when 

the skull bone is totally penetrated. The device can selectively deform the hard bone tissue while 

effectively protecting the soft tissue with negligible machining capability (such as the dura beneath 

skull). As shown in Fig. 2d, sustained tool -dura contact by the ultrasonic on di d not cut or penetrate the 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 7

dura mater. Even after 30 seconds of continuous contact, no visible tear or damage could be observed 

on the dura under SEM (Fig. 2d). This selective machining capability can ensure safe micro -hole 

craniotomy at the skull -dura int erface. 

Fig ure 2. Acupuncture -like high quality micro -hole craniotomy with a low force and minimal 

thermal effects . (a) Simulation of the micro -hole craniotomy at different feed depth h; scale bar: 200 

μm. (b) SEM images of the finite -depth micro -hole craniotomy test; the ultrasonic micro -tool was fed 

to a given depth h in skull and withdrawn; scale bar: 100 μm. (c) Low -force micro -hole craniotomy. 

The micro -hole craniotomy force is comparable to skin penetratio n performed on rat skin with a 

subcutaneous injection needle (diameter: ~ 500 μm; n = 4); ns: no significant difference (P<0.0 1). (d)

Safe m icro -hole craniotomy at the skull -dura interface . SEM images show that after sustained contact 

with the ultrasonic micro -tool , the dura is intact without visible damage; scale bar: 100 μm. Rabbit bone 

and dura samples were used in c-d. (e) Micro -hole craniotomy with effective cooling; micro -channels 

could be machined in the long and slender micro -tool with micro -outlets prepared on the side -wal l for 

cooling ; without this design, low -thermal effects would be difficult to achieve . (f) Represen tative 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 8

temperature -time curves measured at 0.5 mm off the hole wall with optimized cooling and without 

cooling. (g) Simulated temperature contours around the micro -hole with cooling and without cooling. 

In f-g in vitro tests were performed on freshly harvested rabbit skull bone half -immersed in the water -

bath to a physiological temperature of 37℃. (h-i) Skull samples harvested from rats at different time 

after micro -hole craniotomy and the corresponding histological ima ges after hematoxylin -eosin (H&E) 

staining; scale bar in h: 4.0 mm; scale bar in i: 300 μm. 

The ultrasonic micro -hole craniotomy technique has minimal thermal effects on the skull bone (Fig. 

2e -g). In the micro -hole craniotomy process without cooling , heat generation generated by the friction 

between the plastically deformed bone tissue and the ultrasonic micro -tool would cause the temperature 

in the bone tissue around the micro -hole to rise to about 110 ℃ (Fig. 2g ). If left untreated, this wo uld 

lead to thermal necrosis, impairing post -operation recovery. To address this problem, w e have developed 

an effective cooling method . With advanced micro -machining technique s, a co -axial micro -channel for 

internal cooling was prepared in the long slender tool, with micro -outlets (size: about 100 μm) prepared 

on the sidewall at the distal end. Pressurized saline coolant delivered through the micro -outlet could be 

atomized by the ultrasonic vibration and appl ied to the craniotomy site (Fig. 2e ). With optimized cooling, 

the bone temperature measured at 0.5 mm off the hole wall was only ~34.2℃ (Fig. 2f ), effectively 

prevent ing heat build -up and keeping the bone tissue around the micro -hole at a low temperature. 

Incorporating the experimentally measured temperature data into the thermal conduction model, the 

maximal temperature at hole wall was predicted to be about 43℃, significantly lower than that without 

cooli ng (Fig. 2g ). Without cooling, irreversible thermal necrosis would be induced when bone tissue 

was exposed to a temperature of  ＞47°C for one minute 33.

Micro -hole craniotomy with l ow thermal effect s was confirm ed in vivo . At different weeks after 

micro -hole craniotomy on SD rats , bone samples were harvested for histological staining 34 (Fig. 2h -i).

Due to excessive heat generation during micro -hole craniotomy w ithout cooling, the micro -hole was 

not healed even after 5 wee ks ( Fig. 2h ). In contrast, with optimized cooling, micro -hole s were able to 

heal in 2 weeks and the hole cavity was filled by regenerated soft tissue ; bone mineralization was even 

observed at Week 3 (Fig. 2i ). Thus , we show that with optimized cooling , the micro -hole craniotomy 

could allow rapid postoperative recovery (e.g., in 2 weeks ). Micro -hole craniotomy and rapid recovery 

significantly minimize the invasiveness of the micro -intervention operation .

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 9

Smart control to enhance the safety of micro -intervention at the skull -dura interface 

Precis e detection of the craniotomy termination at t he skull -dura interface is crucial for safe micro -

hole craniotomy (Fig. 3a) . For this purpose, we have developed a smart control system consisting of a

hardware unit and a breakthrough detection algorithm . The breakthrough detection algorithm was 

developed with multi -mode information (Fig. 3a) , which were filtered and processed for control 

purpose s35 . The ultra sonic device could be further integrated with a robotic arm and an optical 

navigation system (Fig. 3 b), allowing the ex ecution of micro -hole craniotomy along a predefined 

trajectory. Through systematic in vitro testing, we show that the smart -control system can precisely 

detect craniotomy termination with a response time of 34.0 ± 16.4 ms and a distance error of 16.2 ± 

17.2 μm (Fig. 3c), which could be further improved by upgrading the hardware system and the co ntrol 

method in the future. 

Figure 3. Smart control for safe micro -hole craniotomy at the skull -dura interface . (a) Detection 

of the craniotomy termination at the skull -dura interface. (b) Robot assisted micro -hole craniotomy; 

operated by a robot, micro -hole craniotomy can be performed freely at any location on the head along 

a pre -defined trajectory. (c) Performance of termination detection as represented by the average distance 

error and the delay time (n = 3) , which were characterized by commanding the micro -tool to continue 

feed ing for a prescribed distance after detection of craniotomy termination by the control system . (d)

Demonstrat ion of smart termination detection on a fresh egg . The fresh eggshell was filled blue dye 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 10

solution. With smart control, a micro -hole was safely generated on eggshell without piercing the inner 

soft membrane . I n the control group (no smart control ), the soft membrane was damage d, leading to 

dye leakage . (e) Safe in vivo micro -hole craniotomy on New Zealand rabbits . After micro -hole 

craniotomy, blue dye was dispensed to the micro -hole; no staining was observed on the brain cortex 

with smart control .

Safe and precise micro -hole craniotomy was demonstrated by performing micro -hole perforation 

on a fresh eggshell (Fig. 3d). With smart control, the ultrasonic micro -tool was able to precisely 

penetrate the hard egg shell without piercing the underlying sof t membrane. Safe micro -hole craniotomy 

with smart termination detection was further val idated in vivo on anaesthetized rabbits. After micro -

hole craniotomy, blue dye was dispensed into the micro -hole . In the control group, a blue staining was 

observed on brain, reflecting that continuous tool feeding without smart control would damage the dura 

and the cortex. I n the test with smart termination detection , no blue staining was observed on the brain, 

indicating that the dura mater was intact (Fig. 3e). 

The m inimally invasive hybrid BCI based on micro -hole craniotomy 

Fig. 4a illustrates the concept of a minimally invasive hybrid BCI . Using the micro -hole 

craniotomy method, micro -holes can be safely prepare d at specific location s on the skull . Micro -

electrodes can then be implanted into these micro -holes , with the distal end contacting the dura and the 

proximal end placed subcutaneously at the scalp -skull interface. Once the acupuncture -like micro -

wounds on the scalp have healed , a minimally invasive and hybrid BCI can be established by placing a 

wearable headset over the microelectrode implantation site (Fig. 4a ). The microelectrode implanted in 

the skull establish es a stable and low -resistance path way for measuring the neural signals in the brain 

or delivering electrical stimulation into the brain , providing an effective measure to overcome the 

constraints imposed by the skull .

To verify the benefits and feasibility of the minim ally invasive hybrid BCI , we prepared 

customized microelectrodes for micro -hole implantation. As shown in Fig. 4b, the Pt -Ir microelectrode 

has a cylindrical body with a diameter of 500 μm ( the same as the micro -hole) and a flange with a 

diameter of 700 -4000 μm at its proximal end as the depth -limiting structure. For animal experiments, a

small Ag/AgCl electrode with a diameter of 3.0 mm was customized to acquir e neural signals from the 

scalp of SD rats (Fig. 4c) . This electrode was shown to have a low impedance (< 1 k Ω) in the 0-100 Hz 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 11

frequency range and significant non -polarization characteristics , with the phase angle stabilizing 

between -10° and -30° in the weak capacitive range (see Fig. 4d -e). These characteristics (low 

impedance and high charge transfer efficiency ) effectively reduce the thermal noise and the baseline 

drift introduced by the electrode -skin interface, ensur ing a high signal -to -noise ratio and a stable 

baseline during neural signal acquisition. 

Figure 4. The minimally invasive hybrid BCI based on micro -intervention. (a) Implementation of 

the minimally invasive BCI, including micro -hole craniotomy, implantation of microelectrode s into 

micro -holes in the skull, and plac ement of wearable electrodes/headset on the scalp to establish the 

hybrid BCI. (b) Microelectrodes for implantation into micro -holes in the skull ; the proximal end comes 

in sizes ranging from 700 to 4000 μm; the electrode shank has a diameter of 500 μm. (c) Customi zed 

Ag/AgCl electrodes for neural sensing on the scalp . (d -e) Impedance and phase angle spectrum of the 

Ag/AgCl electrode .

High -quality neural recording by the hybrid BCI 

Effectiveness of the hybrid BCI for high -quality neural sensing was verified by measuring the 

resting -state neural signals and the somatosensory evoked potential s in re spo nse to a mechanical 

puncture. In the in vivo tests, microelectrodes (Fig.4b ) were subcutaneously implanted into micro -holes 

generated in the rat skull (as E1 and E2 , as indicated in Fig. 5a) . E1 and E2 were located 6 mm apart 

anteriorly and posteriorly and positioned 3 mm from the midline , in rat’s somatosensory and visual 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 12

cortica l regions, respectively. C1 and C2, which were located s ymmetrically on the opposite side of the 

skull to the electrode implantation sites, were used as the control for acquiring EEG signals . Once the 

scalp wound had healed, the hairs were removed and the Ag/AgCl electrode (see Fig. 4c ) were attached 

to the scalp at E1, E2, C1 and C2 with the conductive paste in order to non -invasively measure the 

neural signal. The hybrid BCI with implanted electrodes of proximal size s of 0.7 mm, 1.5 mm , and 4.0 

mm is denoted as the hybrid BCI -0.7, hybrid BCI -1.5, and hybrid BCI -4.0 , respectively. 

Figure 5. The hybrid BCI for hi gh -quality neural recording . (a-b) Illustration of microelectrode 

implantation in the skull of SD rats . E1 and E2 are the locations for subcutaneous implantation of 

microelectrodes , as shown in Fig. 4b; C1 and C2 are the positions for EEG recording without electrode 

implantation (control ). Neural signals w ere obtained by measuring the difference between E1 and E2 

or C1 and C2, with reference to the common ground (GND). (c) Power spectral density (PSD) plots of 

the resting -state neural signals measured on the scalp of anesthetized rats (E1 -E2) using the hybrid BCI 

with microelectrodes of different proximal dimensions (0.7 mm, 1.5 mm and 4.0 mm) ; control: the 

conventional resting -state EEG signal s measured at C1 -C2 without implanted microelectrodes. (d) 

Comparison of the power density in different frequency ranges for neural signals measured by different 

strategies as shown in (c). (e) Comparison of the somatosensory evoked potential waveforms measured 

by different method s. M echanical puncture was applied to the rat tail using a blunt -tipped needle with 

a diameter of 0.3 mm that was controlled by a numerically controlled linear actuator . A typical force 

curve applied during the mechanical stimulation is also provided. (f) Signal -to -noise ratio (SNR) of 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 13

somatosensory evoked potential s measured by the methods shown in (e) . Neural signals for the control 

group in c -f were obtained at the C1 -C2 locations in rats with implanted microelectrodes of a proximal 

size of 0.7 mm. 

The hybrid BCI can evidently increase the strength of the measured neural signal s in both the low -

and high -frequency ranges. Fig. 5c shows the power spectral density plots of the neural signal measured 

using the hybrid BCI with implanted microelectrodes of different proximal dimension s (control: the 

convention al EEG measured between C1 and C2) . Even the hybrid BCI using an implanted micro -

electrode with a proximal size of 0.7 mm (hy brid BCI -0.7) could evidently increase the power of the 

measured neural signal in the low -frequency range (0 -50 Hz) . T he hybrid BCI -1.5 increase d the power 

further in the high -frequency range (50 -90 Hz) , and the hybrid BCI -4.0 increased the power across the 

entire frequency range (Fig. 5c). Further more , the neural signals were characterized in to five typical 

frequency bands : d elta (1- 4.0 Hz ), theta (4-8 Hz ), alpha (8-13 Hz ), beta (13-30 Hz ), and gamma (30 -

100 Hz ). As shown in Fig. 5d, the absolute power for the hybrid BCI groups was significantly higher 

than that for the control group . Compared to the EEG signals at different frequencies, the power strength 

of neural signals measured by the hybrid BCI -1. 5 was 5, 3.8, 4.1, 4.1 and 2.6 times higher in the 

frequency bands of delta, theta, alpha, beta, and gamma, respectively . The power strength of the neural 

signals mea sured by the hybrid BCI -4.0 was 8.9, 6.3, 6.6, 6.7 and 4.1 times greater than that of the 

conventional EEG in the frequency bands of delta, theta, alpha, beta, and gamma, respectively. 

The hybrid BCI enables the detection of evoked neural responses with a high signal -to -noise ratio. 

To demonstrate this, periodic mechanical stimulation was applied to the rat tail using a blunt -tipped 

needle to evoke the somatosensory evoked potentials (SEP) , which were simultaneously measured 

between E1 and E2 using the hybrid BCI and between C1 and C2 using the conventional EEG. Fig. 5e

shows the SEP waveforms measured by different method s after time -domain superposition and 

averaging. Compared to the control group (SEP measured by EEG) , the SEP signals measured by the 

hybrid BCI group exhibited characteristic peaks with higher amplitudes . Therefore , the use of implanted 

microelectrodes with a larger proximal size can help increase the sensitivity in captur ing functionally 

synchronized burst signals. 

The hybrid BC I has been shown to function consistently well in repeated tests. The SEP tests were 

performed on 12 independent SD rats (four in each group) using the hybrid BCI. The s ignal -to -noise 

ratio (SNR) of the SEP measured on the different rats is compared in Fig. 5f . The data matrix exhibited 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 14

a clear and consistent increas e from the left to the right, from the conventional EEG to the hybrid BCI. 

In the EEG control group , the SN R for SEP ranged from 12.03 to 20.78 ; for the hybrid BCI -1.5, it 

increased to 18.25 -29.75 ; and for the hybrid BCI -4.0, it increased further to 33.25 -46.68. Therefore, 

despite the physiological difference s between different animals, the hybrid BCI can reliably increase 

the strength of the neural signals measured (Fig. 5c -d) and increase the SNR for detecting evoked action 

potentials (Fig. 5e -f). 

Steady -state visual evoked potentials detected by the hybrid BCI 

The hybrid BCI enhance s the ability to reliably measure steady -state visual evoked potentials 

(SSVEP) with a high signal -to -noise ratio. Fig. 6a illustrates the experimental setup for evaluating the 

performance of the hybrid BCI in capturing SSVEP elicited by a light stimulator flashing at different 

frequencies . In the setup, an anesthetized rat was placed in a fully dark and electromagnetically shielded 

environment , with a white -light source positioned in front of the rat and flashing at different frequencies. 

As shown in Fig. 6b, t he SSVEP was measured simultaneously between E2 -Ref using the hybrid BCI 

method and between C2 -Ref using the conventional EEG (the Ref electrode , located on the midline of 

the occipital bone , was used as the differential reference ). Neural signals measured by different methods 

in response to the periodic flashing light stimuli (8 Hz, 10 Hz, 12 Hz, and 14 Hz ) were processed to 

extract the frequency -domain feat ures .

Figure 6d shows a comparison of the power spectrum plots of the SSVEP elicited by flashing lights 

of different frequencies and measured by different methods. In the control group (the conventional 

EEG), the spectral plots of the EEG signal were rela tively flat within the stimulation frequency range, 

with no evident characteristic energy peaks around the four testing frequencies (Fig. 6d(i)). This would 

be attributed to skull’s attenuation and filtering effects. This phenomenon highlights the inadequa cy of 

traditional non -invasive scalp electrodes in capturing low -intensity neural activity. However, distinct 

SSVEP peaks could be observed at 8 Hz, 10 Hz, 12 Hz and 14 Hz in the hybrid BCI group (Fig.6d(ii -

iv)). Even in the hybrid BCI -0.7 group, the impla nted microelectrode with a proximal size of just 0.7 

mm was able to capture distinct narrow -band peaks around the stimulation frequency. For the hybrid 

BCI -1.5 group, steep and prominent characteristic SSVEP peaks appeared at the stimulation frequencies 

of 8 Hz, 10 Hz, 12 Hz, and 14 Hz (or their resonant frequencies, not shown here), with a significant 

increase in the amplitude. As the proximal end of the implanted microelectrode increased to 4.0 mm, 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 15

the intensity of the detected SSVEP increased further (Fi g. 6d(iv)), providing high -quality signal s for 

neural decoding or control purposes. 

Figure 6. Tests on steady -state visual evoked potentials (SSVEP) measured by different methods. 

(a) Schematic diagram of showing the SSVEP experiment al setup. (b) SSVEP was measured between 

E2 and Ref for the hybrid BCI group or between C2 and Ref for the control group. (c) The protocol for 

the SSVEP test ; the SSVEP was elicited by the light stimulator flashing at different frequencies with a 

constant pulse width of 900 μs. (d) Comparison of the SSVEP measured by different methods . Neural 

signals for the control group were obtained at C2 for rats implanted with the microelectrode with a 

proximal size of 0.7 mm. 

Stability of the hybrid BCI for SSVEP detection was evaluated via repeated tests on different 

animals (four animals per group) . The merits of the hybrid BCI was quantitatively evaluated by 

comparing SNR of SSVEP on different animals under different stimulation frequencies in Fig. 7a .

Meanwhile, Fig. 7b-e shows the frequency spectrum for neural signals measured by the different 

methods o n four independent rats at stimulation frequencies of 8 Hz, 10 Hz, 12 Hz and 14 Hz using the 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

fast Fourier transform method (the 30 -second stimulation was repeated five times on each rat ). In the 

control group (Fig. 7 b), the SSVEP signals were difficult to detect across different animals , owing to 

the attenuation effects caused by the skull .

Figure 7. Repeated SSVEP test s performed using the hybrid BCI method. (a) Heatmap showing 

the SNR of the SSVEP measured using different methods under different conditions. (b-e) SSVEP 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 17

spectra measured using the setup shown in Fig. 6a by the conventional EEG (control), the hybrid BCI -

0.7, the hybrid BCI -1.5, and the hybrid BCI -4.0. Neural signals for the control group were obtained at 

C2 from rats implanted with a microelectrode of a proximal size of 0.7 mm. The SNR value in (a) is an 

average of the five data points shown in b -e for each animal . The tests were performed on four different 

animals under each condition. In (a), each block represents an independent rat as in Fig. 5f. 

When the 0.7 mm microelectrode was implanted, the SSVEP could be clearly detect ed across four 

different animals, despite the fluctuations in SNR (see Fig. 7c). In the hybrid BCI -1.5 and the hybrid 

BCI -4.0 group, pronounced SSVEP peaks with a higher amplitude were detected with excellent inter -

subject consistency. In particular, the h ybrid BCI -4.0 group exhibited consistent observation of high -

intensity SSVEP characterized by sharp, narrow -band peaks. Additionally, the SNR of the SSVEP 

measured by the conventional EEG remained low, with no significant difference observed across tests 

at different stimulation frequencies. Regarding the hybrid BCI, the SSVEP measured by the hybrid BCI 

tends to have higher peak amplitudes and SNR as the stimulation frequency increases. These findings 

further confirm the benefits of the hybrid BCI for acqui ring high -quality neural signals for future brain -

control applications based on this breakthrough strategy. 

Precise deep brain neural modulation enabled by the hybrid BCI 

The s kull poses a significant barrier for precis e and localized neural modulation, particularly when 

the target is located deep within the brain. In the conventional transcranial electrical stimulation, due to 

skull’s high resistan ce , applied current would spread over a large area on the scalp before entering the 

brain via the path of least resistance . Only a very small portion (~10%) of the applied current actually 

enter ed the brain 17 . It is also difficult to achieve precise brain stimulation via the conventional 

transcranial electrical stimulation. To address this issue, researchers have proposed non -invasive 

temporal interference stimulation (TI) , which involves applying a pair of high -frequency currents 

applied to the scalp to generate a low -frequency envelope electric field within the brain . This enabl es 

electrical stimulation of deep brain targets 36 ,37 .

Due to the spreading effect of the electrical current and the skull’s inherent heterogeneous 

properties, there are two issues that need to be overcome for clinical application of TI , insufficient 

stimulation strength and low stimulation accuracy. Increasing the current applied to the scalp to strength 

the stimulatio n intensity would cause safety issues such as skin burns. Due to the wearable nature of TI 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 18

stimulation , it is almost impossible to ens ure that the electrodes are applied exactly at the same location 

on the scalp between two applications . Any shift in the location of wearable electrode s will exaggerate 

the targeting error of the enveloped electric field in the deep brain. Therefore , despite the safety and 

ease of use of wearable BCI, the shielding and attenuation effects of the skull present an insurmountable 

physical barrier to precise electrical stimulation of the brain. 

To highlight the benefits of the hybrid BCI for precise ne ural modulation, the capability of the 

hybrid BCI for precise whole -brain stimulation was investigated via simulation and compared with the 

conventional transcranial temporal interference stimulation (TI). The simulation was performed on a 

simplified spherical model with a size of the normal human head 38 ,39 , comp rising the scalp, the skull, 

the cerebrospinal fluid and the brain (Fig. 8a). Two typical scenarios were compared in the simulation ,

including the conventional tr anscranial stimulation (either the transcranial alternating current 

stimulation (tACS), or the transcranial temporal interference stimulation (tTI) , Fig. 8b ).

The ultimate version of the hybrid BCI , the wireless hybrid BCI , is also included for comparison 

purposes . The wireless hybrid BCI will have wireless microelectrodes implanted in the skull, which are 

wirelessly powered by and coupled with a wearable headset to enable wireless neural recording or multi -

mode neural modul ation. With the wireless hybrid BCI , electrical stimulation can be directly applied to 

the dura, bypassing the skull and the scalp to achieve effective and precise neural modulation. 

Fig. 8c illustrates the electrical field distribution in the brain result ing from the conventional tACS, 

the hybrid BCI (with implanted microelectrodes and scalp electrodes), and the wireless hybrid BCI 

(with implanted wireless microelectrodes and a wearable wireless headset). In the conventional tACS, 

the skull’s attenuation e ffects cause a significant amount of electrical current to be shunted laterally 

within the scalp layer. This results in an effective electric field reaching the brain that is quite weak (Fig. 

8c -i). In comparison, in the hybrid BCI group, implantation of m icroelectrodes into the skull creates 

low -resistance pathways for current flow and greatly minimizes the shielding effect of the skull, 

significantly increasing the stimulation strength in the brain (the cortex) is significantly increased (Fig. 

8c -ii). For the wireless hybrid BCI, when the stimulation current is applied on the dura (with wireless 

power transmission and wireless control), electrical current’s spreading effect within the scalp can be 

eliminated, increasing the maximum stimulation strength (Fi g. 8c -iii). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 19

Figure 8. The potential of the hybrid BCI for precise stimulation of deep brain targets across the 

whole brain. (a) The simulation model on a simplified brain model , showing the electrode 

configuration for different scenarios : the conventional transcrani al electrical stimulation, the hybrid BCI 

with implanted microelectrodes and wearable electrodes attached on the scalp, and the hybrid wireless 

BCI with implanted wireless microelectrodes. ( b) Illustration of the transcranial alternating current 

stimulation (tACS) with two electrodes, and the temporal interference stimulation (TI) with four 

electrodes. (c) Simulation of the electrical fie ld distribution in the brain for alternating current 

stimu lation by different strategies. ( d) Simulation of the interferential electric field envelope modulation 

in the brain by different methods. (e) Compar ison of the maximum electrical field strength induced in 

the scalp or brain by different methods ; the full width at half maximum (FWHM), which is the distance 

between two points at half the peak intensity in the x direction in Fig. 8d, represents the focus of the 

envelope electric field. (f) The f ocus of the envelope electrical field can be adjusted by changing the 

electro de locations; the values are normalized to the maximum envelope amplitude (MEA); c ol or m aps 

are in V/m . (g) The focus of the envelope electrical field for neural modulation can be adjusted by 

changing the current ratio between the two pairs of electrodes . I1 = I2 = 1 mA in c , d and f; I1+I2= 2 

mA in g; the color maps in c,d, f and g are in V/m .

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 20

We demonstrate the feasibility of precise deep brain modulation using the hybrid BCI . Fig. 8d 

shows a comparison of the interferential electric field envelope amplitude maps of the conventional 

transcranial TI (tTI), the hybrid BCI, and the wireless hybrid BCI . Fig. 8e shows a comparison of the 

maximum envelope amplitude (MEA) in the scal p or the brain . T he focus of the envelope electric field 

is represented by the full width at half maximum (FWHM ), which is the distance between two points 

at half the peak intensity in the x direction (see Fig. 8d ). A smaller FWHM indicates a more focused 

envelope field. Similar to the tACS, the transcranial TI has a low envelope amplitude in the brain, with 

a diffused center region (Fig. 8d -i). For the TI stimulation using the hybrid BCI, the induced envelope 

electrical field is more focuse d, with a larger MEA in the center. When the TI stimulation is performed 

using the wireless hybrid BCI, neural modulation of a higher intensity can be applied precisely to a 

focused zone with an even smaller FWHM. Findings in Fig. 8d -e clearly demonstrate the advantages 

of the hybrid BCI over the conventional non -invasive TI for effective and selective stimulation of deep 

brain targets. 

The potential of the hybrid BCI for precise neural stimulation across the whole brain is further 

demonstrated. In Fig. 8f -g, we show that the focus of the envelop e electric field can be flexibly 

controlled by adjusting either the electrode implantation locations (as in Fig. 8f) or the current ratio 

between I1 and I2 (as in Fig. 8g). Furthermore , the microelectrodes can be implanted at any predefined 

locations across the head and optimized by an AI -agent for the minimally invasi ve BCI. In this manner, 

one or more targets located deep in the brain can be stimulated in a specific spatial and temporal order ,

providing a precise, robust and versatile and tool for brain network modulation. 

3. Conclusion and discussion 

In this study, we introduce a minimally invasive hybrid BCI architecture compris ing of four elements :

the safe and smart micro -hole craniotomy ; distributed microelectrodes implanted in micro -holes in the 

skull ; a bi -directional wearable headpiece ; and an AI -assisted planning and control framework . The 

di stributed microelectrodes are implanted subcutaneously at pre -defined locations in the skull, with 

their distal end s in contact with the dura and their proximal end s at the scalp -skull interface . The 

wearable headpiece is coupled with the implanted microelectrodes for neural recording or stimulation. 

The AI -assisted brain agent is intended to support the deployment of the hybrid BCI across the whole 

brain, including but not limited to the planning of the electrode implantation , optimiz ing the pairing 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 21

between implanted microelectrodes and the wearable headset, or d ecod ing neural signals for closed -

loop control. The hybrid BCI thus establish a technological pathway between the conventional non -

invasive and the intracranial invasive BCI systems .

The enabling technique of the hybrid BCI is the ultrasonic vibration assisted micro -hole 

craniotomy method. Currently, achieving safe micro -hole craniotom y without impairing the dura is 

difficult using existing techniques. In this study , the safe and smart micro -hole craniotomy method 

developed by our team enables micro -hole generation in a convenient manner like acupuncture . Micro -

tunnel s can be dexterously prepared at pre -defined positions on the skull with a low axial force, minimal 

thermal effects, and precise termination detection. This significantly reduc es the risk of surgical 

inflammation and provides a micro -tunnel to reach the skull -dura boundary while maintaini ng dura 

integrity. 

Feasibility of the hybrid BCI has been verified in vivo with rat experiments. W e demonstrated that ,

in comparison with the conventional scalp EEG, microelectrodes placed in micro -holes in the skull 

could increase resting -state spectral power intensity and improve the signal -to -noise ratio for detecting 

the somatosensory and steady -state visual evoked responses. These in vivo results provide a solid proof 

that the hybrid BCI architecture can substantially enhance th e access to brain -generated electrical 

signals across multiple frequency bands and response paradigms. The robust performance of the hybrid 

BCI has also been verified through repeated tests. The next step is to develop a wireless hybrid BCI and 

test it on free -moving animals for wireless neural recording and stimulation. Harvest ing high -quality, 

high -fidelity neural signals in a minimally invasive manner will provide valuable information for future 

neural decoding and close d-loop brain contr ol applications. 

The distributed architecture provides a scalable pathway for whole -brain coverage . Distributed 

micro electrode s (or nodes ) can be placed at selected locations on the skull , with more nodes 

incrementally added as required for clinical purposes . Whole -brain coverage is difficult to achieve by 

existing invasive BCI methods . While it is technically possible to implant as many electrodes as needed, 

such an invasive procedure may not be clinically feasible . The hybrid BCI therefore offers a versatile 

means of interact ing with the brain via distributed microelectrode s implanted in micro -hole s across the 

cranial surface , the number and position of which can be dynamically adjusted according to patient ’s 

need s.

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 22

Our simulation results show that the skull -dura micro electrodes can reshape the current pathways, 

reduce superficial current shunting, and improve both the electric -field strength and the focality for 

stimulating deep brain targets , compared to t he conventional transcranial stimulation. A simplified 

spherical model was used to enable a controlled comparison of different stimulation strategies . Together 

with the programmable electrode locations and current ratios, the simulation results confirm the 

feasibility of steering stimulation toward s cortical and deep targets across the brain , provid ing a solid 

basis for future multi -target, temporally coordinated network modulation. Thus, t he hybrid BCI will 

provide an effective and well -controlled tool for whole -brain modulation, which is highly demanded 

for the treatment of neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric diseases, including but not limited to 

refractory depression, addiction, neuropathic headaches, sleep disorders and Alzheimer’s disease. 

Extending this hybrid framework to include patient -specific head models, realistic electrode -tissue 

interfaces, dose -response stud y and in vivo validation will define the translational performance of the 

hybrid BCI in the near future. 

In the next stage, these validated building blocks will be integrated into a chronic wireless hybrid 

BCI system with bidirectional reading and writing functionalities , while preserving the core architecture 

of a simple implanted interface coupled to an externally upgradable wearable platform. Priority studies 

will include investigating long -term electrode -dura stability, biocompatibility , the safety of r epeated -

stimulation, MRI compatibility, artifact recovery during read -write switching, and closed -loop 

performance. These are tractable engineering and translational milestones that can be achieved through 

large -animal studies, verification testing, and clinical feasibility trials .

From a clinical application perspective , the microelectrodes of the hybrid BCI can be implanted in 

a manner similar to hair transplant , which makes them readily accepted by a large patient populatio n.

The microelectrodes can be designed to be MRI -compatible for long -term implantation in the skull . The 

hybrid nature of this system allows it to evolve at both the hardware and software levels , either by 

implanting more electrodes or by upgrading the wearable headset and the AI agent. 

Taken together, the present study validates the foundational architecture of the minimally invasive 

hybrid BCI at three complementary levels: safe and controllable acces s to the brain via micro -holes in 

the skull , enhanced neural sensing in vivo, and computationally supported modulation of deep brain 

targets. The convergence of surgical, electrophysiological, and computational evidence establishes a 

clear and credible tra nslational pathway toward s a chronic, wireless, distributed, and bidirectional BCI 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 23

system. Thro ugh ongoing validation, this hybrid BCI architecture will occupy a distinct design space 

between the conventional noninvasive BCI and existing invasive BCI in which the burden of the 

surgical procedur e, the signal quality, the spatial extensibility, and the system’s long -term upgradability 

are jointly optimized , to support high -quality cortical recording, precise deep brain modulation, and 

network -level closed -loop control. 

4. Methods 

Simulation of the micro -hole craniotomy . The micro -hole craniotomy process was simulated in 

Abaqus using the smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) method 30 . A freshly harvested skull bone 

sample from the adult New Zealand rabbit (12 -14 weeks) was scanned with the Micro -CT (SkyScan 

1176, Bruker, resolution: 8.8 μm)  40 . A representative CT image was used to construct skull bone’s 2D 

model . In order to mi mic skull bone’s micro -porous structure, micropores were randomly generated in 

the selected CT image using Matlab 58 ,59 ; the cortical bone was set to have a porosity of 7.8% 41 ; the 

resulted image was subsequently processed by Mimics and SolidWorks, generating a two -dimensional 

executable file which was subsequently processed in Abaqus for particle segmentation with a 

customized Python script 42 . A 2D SPH model was then constructed. The ultrasonic micro -tool was 

modelled as a rigid body; side surfaces of bone sample were fully constrained; skull sample’s bottom 

surface was constrained in all directions except for the area around the hole exit. Skull tissue was 

assumed to be isotropic 43 . Elastic and plastic properties of the skull bone were adopted from published 

studies 44 -46 ; the shear damage model was used to simu late skull bone’s damage behavior. Stress, plastic 

strain, material flow around the micro -tool were simulated. 

Micro -hole craniotomy experiment . Micro -hole craniotomy experiment and finite indentation tests 

were performed . Animal experiments were performed with institutional approval (IACUC approval 

number: SYSU -IACUC -2023 -000446 ). Bone samples from central part of the skull (length: 12 mm; 

width: 6 mm; thickness: ~ 1.5 mm) were harvested from euthanized adult New Zealand rabbits (18 -21 

weeks) and preserved in PBS solution prior to experiment s. Micro -hole craniotomy was performed by 

feeding the ultrasonic tool towards the skull bone; the craniotomy force was recorded by a force sensor. 

After experiment, bone samples were freeze -drie d, sputtered -coated and observed under SEM. To 

investigate the micro -hole craniotomy process, the micro -tool was fed to a fi nite depth in skull (100 -

1000 μ m) and then retracted to observe the hole morphology under SEM. 

Low force micro -hole craniotomy in comparison with skin penetration . In order to highlight the 

merit of low -force micro -hole craniotomy, in vivo and in vitro skin penetration tests were performed 

with a subcutaneous injection needle (bevel -tipped; diameter: 500 μm). In vivo tests were conducted on 

anesthetized SD rats (12 -14 weeks). After hair removal, s kin penetration was executed on r at back with 

numerical control . In vitro tests were performed on the skin of anesthetized rats . The maximum skin 

penetration force was recorded for comparison. Animal experiments were performed with institutional 

approval (SYSU -IACUC -2023 -000446 ). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 24

In vitro tool -dura contact test . Dura samples were harvested from euthanized adult New Zealand 

rabbits and clamped onto a customized sample holder. The ultrasonic tool was lower ed to press the dura 

mater for a distance of 500 μm, mimicking tool -dura contact at the end of craniotomy; after different 

time of tool -dura contact (2 -60 seconds), tool -dura contact area was observed under the optical 

microscope a nd characterized under SEM (after freeze -drying and sputter coating with gold ). 

Micro -hole craniotomy with low thermal effects . As tool -bone friction would be the main cause for 

heat generation in the micro -hole craniotomy process , effective cooling was applied to reduce the 

temperature during micro -hole craniotomy . Saline coolant (temperature: 20℃) was applied to the 

craniotomy site . Temperature in skull bone around the micro -hole were systematically investigated 

under different cooling conditions with micro -thermal couples which were pre -embedded in pre -drilled 

micro -holes of the bone sample. Micro -hole craniotomy was performed at different distances off the 

micro -thermal couple. 

Temperature profile around the micr o-hole was simulated with the steady -state heat transfer model 

in Abaqus . A 500 μm diameter micro -hole was modelled in a rectangular skull bone sample (thermal 

conductivity: 0.56 W/(m·K) 47 ). Consistent with the in vitro test, temperature for bone s ample’s top 

surface was set to be 20°C; temperature for bone surfaces immersed in water or in air was 37°C and 

25. 4℃ (room temperature measured at the day of experiment) , respectively. An initial temperature was 

applied to micro -hole’s inner surface to simulate the temperature profile ; mean difference between 

simulated temperature and experimentally measured temperature at different distances off the hole wall 

(0.5, 1.0, 1. 5, and 2.0 mm) was calculated for each initial temperature. Temperature profiles in bone 

tissue around the micro -hole with or without cooling were simulated and compared with experimental 

results. 

Fast recovery after micro -hole craniotomy via in vivo tests . Quick recovery after micro -hole 

craniotomy was investigated in vivo on adult SD rats (6 -8 weeks). After proper anesthesia, hair removal 

and skin disinfection, a small incision was made on scalp for micro -hole craniotomy with optimized 

cooling (contr ol: no cooling). Four micro -holes were symmetrically generated on rat skull (two on the 

left and two on the right ; hole -to -hole distance: ~ 4 mm ); after experiment, the incision on scalp was 

properly sutured. At 2 -5 weeks after surgery, rats were euthanized to harvest skull samples for H &E

staining 48 . Animal experiments were performed with institutional approval (IACUC approval number: 

SYSU -IACUC -2023 -000446 ). 

Smart control for craniotomy termination detection . A smart control system has been developed for 

precise detection of craniotomy termination. A control algorithm is developed for the detection of tip 

breakthrough or craniotomy termination ; skull thickness d0 along the craniotomy path could be used as 

the reference. Performance of the craniotomy termination detection system was investigated from the 

perspective of delay time (or response time ) and distance error . Systematic in vitro tests were performed 

with fresh rabbit skull samples . The delay time is defined as the time difference between the moment 

of breakthrough detect ed by the control algorithm to the moment of actual termination of tool feeding 

(recorded by the control algorithm) . As for the distance error, the ultrasonic micro -tool was comm anded 

to continue feeding for a n extra distance of La0 after breakthrough detection; micro -tool’s actual 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 25

protrusion length over skull ’s inner surface ( La1 ) minus the prescribed protrusion length ( La0 ) was 

defined as the distance error (La1 and La0 were measured under the microscopic camera). 

In vitro demonstration of smart termination detection was performed on fresh eggs. An opening 

was made on the eggshell to fill the shell with blue dye solution. Micro -hole perforation was performed 

on eggshell using the ultrasonic micro -tool with the smart control method (control: without smart 

control). If shell breakthrough could be accurately detected, eggshell’s inner membrane would be intact, 

and dye leakage would not be observed. Micro -holes generated on eggshell were observed under the 

optical microscope and SEM to characterize the integrity of the soft membrane after micro -hole 

perforation. 

Micro -hole craniotomy with smart control was demonstrated in vivo on New Zealand rabbits. 

Animal experiments were performed with institutional approval (IACUC approval nu mber: SYSU -

IACUC -2023 -000446 ). After proper anesthesia, hair removal and skin disinfection, a n incision was 

made on scalp to expose the skull; two micro -holes were symmetrically performed on skull (one on the 

left, and one on the right) . In the experiment group, micro -hole craniotomy was performed with smart 

control and cooling . In the control group, micro -hole craniotomy was executed with disabled smart 

control, allowing the ultrasonic tool feed t o a depth of 4.0 mm beneath skull surface. After micro -hole 

craniotomy, blue dye solution (Evans blue) was dispensed into micro -hole s on the skull . 30 minutes 

later, the rabbit was euthanized; the skull was removed to examine (1) whether a through -hole was 

formed on skull and (2) integrity of the brain cortex beneath the craniotomy site ( if the brain was 

damaged, impaired cortex would be stained by the blue dye). A through -hole and intact cortex would 

confirm the safe and smart micro -hole craniotomy. 

Microelectrode implantation . Animal experiments were performed with institutional approval 

(SYSU -IACUC -2026 -000788). Twelve male SD rats (250 -300 g ) were randomly assigned into 3 groups 

(n = 4 per group). During surgery, animals were anesthetized with isoflurane (induction 3% -5%, 

maintenance 1% -3%) and secured onto a stereotaxic frame ; meloxicam (1 mg/kg) was subcutaneously 

administer ed for preemptive analgesia. Micro -hole craniotomy was performed at specific locations 

shown in Fig. 5b or Fig. 6b. After hair removal, the surgical site was sterilized with iodopovidone and 

70 v/v% ethanol . Microelectrodes with different proximal dimensions ( 0.7 mm, 1.5 mm, and 4.0 mm ;

see Fig. 4b ) were implanted into the micro -holes (E1 and E 2 in F ig. 5b) , with electrode’s distal end in 

contact with the dura and its proximal end subcutaneously implanted at the skull -scalp interface . Length 

of the microelectrode was customized to fit the local skull thickness. Contralateral locations C1 and C2 

were used for scalp EEG without micro -intervention 49 . After surgery, meloxicam (1 mg/kg) was 

subcutaneously administered daily for 3 consecutive days for postoperative analgesia , and all rats were 

monitored daily. Animals were allowed to recover under standard housing conditions for 1 week to 

allow the scalp incisions to heal. All t welve animals were properly recovered from the surgery for 

subsequent testing. 

Resting state neural signa l. After anesthesia with isoflurane (1% -3%) , hair removal and skin 

disinfection, the Ag/AgCl electrodes (Fig. 4c) were attached with conductive paste to C1 and C2, or E1 

and E2 ; the common ground electrode (GND; Fig.5b) was placed on the skin a t the posterior neck. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 26

Resting -state signals were recorded continuously for 5 minutes per session ; signals were amplified 

using a four -channel differential amplifier (A -M 1700 ) and recorded as the differential potential 

between C1 -C2 (control : scalp EEG ) or E1 -E2 (with microelectrode s implanted )49 ,50 ; the h ardware 

band -pass filter (0.5 –500 Hz) and the 50 Hz notch filter were used during data acquisition. Neural 

signals for the control group were obtained at C1 -C2 only in rats implanted with the micro -electrodes 

with a proximal size of 0.7 mm. Neural signals were recorded via a data acquisition card (DAQ) at a 

sampling rate of 1000 Hz. 

Power spectral analysis. Power spectral density (PSD) was calculated using the Welch method with 2

seconds Hamming -window ed segments (overlap ping ratio: 50%) . PSD values were displa yed in the 

logarithmic scale in the frequency range of 0-100 H z. Band power was calculated by integrating the 

PSD within the d elta (1-4 Hz ), theta (4-8 Hz ), alpha (8-13 Hz ), beta (13 -30 Hz ), and gamma (30 -100 

Hz ) ranges. 

Somatosensory evoked potentials (SEP) . Rats were anesthetized and placed in an electromagnetically 

shield ed environment. Somatosensory stimulation was delivered to the based of the tail by advancing a

blunt -tipped needle (diameter : 300 μm) for 2 mm using a numerically controlled, force -reco rding linear 

actuator. Prior to stimulation, the blunt -tipped needle was adjusted to be in contact with the skin. Stimuli 

were delivered periodically (one cycle of stimulation : 5 s ); a total of 60 cycles of stim ulation was applied 

per rat. A customized LabVIEW program synchronized actuator control, force acquisition, and neural 

signal recording. 

Each s timulus was defined as t = 0 ms . A 500 ms neural signal epoch extending from -25 ms to 

475 ms relative to the stimulus onset was extracted for each tr ial. The 60 epochs were time -aligned and 

averaged to suppress spontaneous background activity and to obtain stable SEP waveforms 51 ,52 . SEP 

signal quality was quantified using the signal -to -noise ratio (SNR) = 20 log 10 (Asignal /RMS noise ), where 

Asignal is the peak -to -peak SEP amplitud e, and RMS noise is the root -mean -square ampl itude of the 25 ms 

pre -stimulus baseline 51 .

The steady -state visual evoked potential (SSVEP) . Rats were anesthetized and placed in an 

electromagnetically shielded cage covered with black out . The visual stimulation system consisted of a

strobe controller and a white -light panel source (70 mm by 70 mm ) that was placed in front of the rat 

eyes 53 . Onset, frequency, and pulse width of the light stim ulation were precisely controlled by the strobe 

controller. In the test , four visual stimulation frequencies (8 Hz, 10 Hz, 12 Hz, and 14 Hz ) w ere used .

For each frequency, five 30 s stimulation blocks were delivered, separated by 10 s dark intervals. 

Th e flash pulse width of the light stimulus was strictly controlled at 900 μs. For example , an 8 Hz 

condition delivered eight evenly spaced flashes per second. Fr equency -domain responses were obtain ed 

using the f ast Fourier transform (FFT) operation to quantify SSVEP components at stimulation 

frequenc ies 53 -55 . SNR of the SSVEP was calculated as follows: 

𝑆𝑁𝑅 = 10 ∗ log 10 [ 𝑁 (𝑓 𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 )

∑ 𝑁 (𝑓 ) − 𝑁 (𝑓 𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 ) 

> 𝑓 ℎ
> 𝑓 =𝑓 𝑙

]

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 27

where, N(fTarget) denotes the power at the target frequency ，and ∑ 𝑁 (𝑓 ) − 𝑁 (𝑓 𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 ) 

> 𝑓 ℎ
> 𝑓 =𝑓 𝑙

denotes the summed power within the 5 -15 Hz band after exclu sion of the target frequency component. 

Simulation of electrical stimulation. A simplified concentric spherical head model was constructed 

for simulation 38 ,39  (Fig. 8a -b) . The model was constructed in Solidworks and imported into COMSOL 

Multiphysics for analysis . The diameter s for the scalp, skull, cerebrospinal (CSF) layer, and the brain 

were set to 190 mm, 182 mm, 172 mm and 170 mm, respectively. The wearable scalp electrode was 

modeled with a diameter of 2 mm and a thickness of 1 mm. The e lectrical properties for different t issue 

and the electrode were obtained from the literature 56 -59  (see Table 1) ; all materials were assumed to be 

homogeneous . Also, u nder the quasi -static approximation for kHz frequency electromagnetic fields, 

where the wavelength is significantly larger than the tissue dimensions, tissue properties were assumed 

to be frequency -independent 56 .

Table 1. Material properties used in the simulation 56 -59 

Sca lp  Skull  Dura  CSF  Grey 

ma tter 

White 

ma tter 

Wearable 

electrode 

Implanted 

microelectrode 

Conductivity 

(S/m) 

0.41  0.01  0.502  1.79  0.31  0.14  1×10 8 2×10 6

Relative 

permittivity 

5000  200  290  110  3000  3000  0.05  1

The electrical field distribution in the brain generated by transcranial alternating current 

stimulation (tACS ), temporal -interference stimulation (TI), the hybrid BCI, and the wireless BCI were 

simulated using the finite element method (FEM) in the electric currents interface of the AC/DC module 

in COMSOL Multiphysics following published studies 56 ,60 ; electrical insulation boundary conditions 

were applied to the external surfaces of the model ; Poisson’s equation , ∇∙(σ∇V) = 0 , was solved in the 

simulation , wh ere σ is the electrical conductivity and V is the electrical potential . The electric field 

strength E was calculated as E = -∇V.

Regarding the electrode configuration , the wearable electrode was placed on the scalp in the 

conventional EEG . I n the hybrid BCI , microelectrodes (diameter: 500 μm) were implanted in the skull 

with the distal end in contact with the dura and the proximal end at the scalp -skull interface . A s for the 

wireless hybrid BCI, only the 500 μm diameter microelectrode was placed on the dura wi thout the scalp 

electrode. In the simulation, e lectrodes were arranged on the xy plane ( z = 0) at an angle of 45° to the 

center (Fig .8b). 

In the tACS or the hybrid BCI , the stimulation current was delivered through wearable scalp 

electrodes . In the wireless hybrid BCI, the stimulation current was delivered through the 

microelectrodes placed on the dura. In the simulation shown in Fig. 8c, d and f, I1 = I2 = 1 mA. In Fig. 

8f, the electrode positi ons were adjusted to investigate their effect on the envelo pe strength. In Fig. 8g, 

the current ratio between I1 and I2 was adjusted while maintain a sum of I1+I2 as 2 mA .

The electric field vectors generated by a pair of electrodes were simulated . For the TI stimulation, 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 28

the electric field vectors ( E1 and E2) from the two electrode pairs (I1 and I2) were calculated separately. 

Envelope extraction for the TI was performed in MATLAB , and the maximum amplitude of the 

interference envelope ( |𝐸 ⃗𝐴𝑀 

> 𝑚𝑎𝑥

(𝑟 )| ) was computed analytically at each spatial position ( r) using the 

following piecewise function: 

|𝐸 ⃗𝐴𝑀 

> 𝑚𝑎𝑥

(𝑟 )| = { 2|𝐸 ⃗2 (𝑟 )|, 𝑖𝑓 |𝐸 ⃗2 (𝑟 )| < |𝐸 ⃗1 (𝑟 )| cos (𝛼 )

2|𝐸 ⃗2 (𝑟 ) × (𝐸 ⃗1 (𝑟 ) − 𝐸 ⃗2 (𝑟 ))|/|𝐸 ⃗1 (𝑟 ) − 𝐸 ⃗2 (𝑟 )|, 𝑜𝑡 ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒 

where , α is the angle between the two electric field vectors E1(r) and E2(r). The maximum envelope 

amplitude (MEA) was quantified in the brain tissue. Spatial focality was assesse d using the full width 

at half maximum (FWHM), the distance between two points at half t he peak intensity in the x-direction 

in the xy -plane (see Fig. 8d). 

Competing interests . Authors declare no competing interests. Patents on the hybrid BCI technique 

have been filed by the Shenzhen BrainXess Technology Co., Ltd in 2026. 

Acknowledgements. Stud y on the minimally invasive BCI was supported by Shenzhen BrainXess 

Technology Co., Ltd. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Dr. Zhe Li at 

zheli05@hotmail.com .

References 

1 Barbosa, R. M. G., Soares, M. C., Portela, D., Guimaraes, T. G. & Cury, R. G. New Perspectives of Deep 

Brain Stimulation Indications for Parkinson's Disease: A Critical Review. Brain Sci 14 (2024). 

https://doi.org:10.3390/brainsci14070638 

2 Dinkelbach, L. et al. SP 7. How to address the poor treatment acceptance for deep brain stimulation in 

Parkinson’s disease. Clinical Neurophysiology 127 , e171 -e172 (2016). 

https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2016.05.193 

3 Wachter, T., Minguez -Castellanos, A., Valldeoriola, F., Herzog, J. & Stoevelaar, H. A tool to improve pre -

selection for deep brain stimula tion in patients with Parkinson's disease. J Neurol 258 , 641 -646 (2011). 

https://doi.org:10.1007/s00415 -010 -5814 -y

4 Lange, M. et al. Underutilization of deep brain stimulation for Parkinson’s disea se? A survey on 

possible clinical reasons. Acta neurochirurgica 159 , 771 -778 (2017).  https://doi.org:10.1007/s00701 -

017 -3122 -3

5 Fuentes, A., Strack, A. & Ostrem, J. Patient and Caregiver Awareness and Attitudes Towards Deep Brain 

Stimulation in Parkinson’s Disease: A Survey -based Study (P2 -3.016). Neurology 102 , 6508 (2024). 

https://doi.org:doi:10.1212/WNL.0000000000206515 

6 Zeitler, D . M., Prentiss, S. M., Sydlowski, S. A. & Dunn, C. C. American Cochlear Implant Alliance Task 

Force: Recommendations for Determining Cochlear Implant Candidacy in Adults. Laryngoscope 134 

Suppl 3 , S1 -S14 (2024).  https://doi.org:10.1002/lary.30879 

7 Marinelli, J. P., Sydlowski, S. A. & Carlson, M. L. Cochlear Implant Awareness in the United States: A 

National Survey of 15,138 Adults. Semin Hear 43 , 317 -323 (2022).  https://doi.org:10.1055/s -0042 -

1758376 

8 D'Haese, P., Van de Heyning, P., Gavilan, J., Zernotti, M. E. & Greenham, P. Trends in Adult Cochlear 

Implant Access and Uptake Across Ten Years of Reported Data. Audiol Res 16 (2026). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 29

https://doi.org:10.3390/audiolres16010019 

9 Cuffin, B. N. Effects of local variations in skull and scalp thickness on EEG's and MEG's. IEEE 

Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 40 , 42 -48 (2002). 

10  Srinivasan, R., Nunez, P. L. & Silberstein, R. B. Spatial filtering and neocortical dynamics: estimates of 

EEG coherence. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 45 , 814 -826 (1998). 

https://doi.org:10.1 109/10.686789 

11  Sun, Y. et al. Minimally Invasive Local -Skull Electrophysiological Modification With Piezoelectric Drill. 

IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering 30 , 2042 -2051 (2022). 

https://doi.org:10.1109/TNSRE.2022.3192543 

12  McCann, H., Pisano, G. & Beltrachini, L. Variation in Reported Human Head Tissue Electrical 

Conductivity Values. Brain Topography 32 , 825 -858 (2019).  https://doi.org:10.1007/s10548 -019 -

00710 -2

13  Akhtari, M. et al. Conductivities of Three -Layer Live Human Skull. Brain Topography 14 , 151 -167 

(2002).  https://doi.org:10.1023/A:1014590923 185 

14  Li, Z. et al. A novel technique for micro -hole forming on skull with the assistance of ultrasonic 

vibration. journal of the mechanical behavior of biomedical materials 57 , 1 -13 (2016). 

15  Calisan, M., Talu, M. F., Pimenov, D. Y. & Giasin, K. Skull Thickness Calculation Using Thermal Analysis 

and Finite Elements. Applied Sciences 11 , 10483 (2021). 

16  Lewis, A., Rattray, B. & Flood, A. Understanding the effects of transcranial direct current stimulation on 

the neurovascular unit: a narrative review. Frontiers in neuroscience 19 , 1667100 (2025). 

https://doi.org:10.3389/fnins.2025.1667100 

17  Underwood, E. Cadaver study challenges brain stimulation methods. Science 352 , 397 -397 (2016). 

https://doi.org:doi:10.1126/science.352.6284.397 

18  Krauss, J. K. et al. Technology of deep brain stimulation: current status and future directions. Nature 

Reviews Neurology 17 , 75 -87 (2021). 

19  Danes hzand, M. et al. Model -based navigation of transcranial focused ultrasound neuromodulation in 

humans: Application to targeting the amygdala and thalamus. Brain stimulation 17 , 958 -969 (2024). 

20  Stepanov, Y. V. et al. Near -infrared light reduces β-amyloid -stimulated microglial toxicity and enhances 

survival of neurons: Mechanisms of light therapy for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer's research & 

therapy 14 , 84 (2022). 

21  McElhaney, J. H. et al. Mechanical properties of cranial bone. Journal of biomechanics 3, 495 -511 

(1970). 

22  Ruan, J. & Prasad, P. The effects of skull thickness variations on human head dynamic impact 

responses. (SAE Technical Paper, 2001). 

23  Niestrawska, J. A. et al. Morpho -mechanical mapping of human dura mater microstructure. Acta 

biomaterialia 170 , 86 -96 (2023). 

24  Adeeb, N., Mortazavi, M. M., Tubbs, R. S. & Cohen -Gadol, A. A. The cranial dura mater: a review of its 

history, embryology, and anatomy. Child's Nervous System 28 , 827 -837 (2012). 

25  Rynes, M. L. et al. Assembly and operation of an open -source, computer numerical controlled (CNC) 

robot for performing cranial microsurgical procedures. Nature protocols 15 , 1992 -2023 (2020). 

26  Cho, W. -S. et al. Keyhole approach and neuroendoscopy for cerebral aneurysms. Journal of Korean 

Neurosurgical Society 60 , 275 -281 (2017). 

27  Ha, T. T., Thieringer, F. M., Bammerlin, M. & Cordier, D. High precision bone cutting by Er: YAG lasers 

might minimize the invasiveness of navigated brain biopsies. Frontiers in Oncology 11 , 690374 (2022). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 30

28  Winter, F. et al. Navigated, robot -driven laser craniotomy for SEEG application using optical coherence 

tomography in an animal model. Frontiers in Robotics and AI 8, 695363 (2021). 

29  Winter, F. et al. Navigated, Robot -Driven Laser Craniotomy for SEEG Application Using Optical 

Coherence Tomography in an Animal Model. Frontiers in robotics and AI 8, 695363 (2021). 

https://doi.org: 10.3389/frobt.2021.695363 

30  Kulper, S. A. et al. Development and initial validation of a novel smoothed ‐particle hydrodynamics ‐

based simulation model of trabecular bone penetration by metallic implant s. Journal of Orthopaedic 

Research® 36 , 1114 -1123 (2018 ). 

31  Yu, S. et al. An improved Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) method for modelling the cracking 

processes of teeth and its applications. Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials 

136 , 105518 (2022). 

32  Guimarães, C. F., Gasperini , L., Marques, A. P. & Reis, R. L. The stiffness of living tissues and its 

implications for tissue engineering. Nature Reviews Materials (2020).  https://doi.org:10.1038/s41578 -

019 -0169 -1

33  Pandey, R. K. & Panda, S. S. Drilling of bone: A comprehensive review. J Clin Orthop Trauma 4, 15 -30 

(2013).  https://doi.org:10.1016/j.jcot.2013.01.002 

34  Gupta, V., Pandey, P. M., Gupta, R. K. & Mridha, A. R. Rotary ultrasonic drilling on bone: a novel 

technique to put an end to thermal injury to bone. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical 

Engineers, Part H: Journal of Engineering in Medicine 231 , 18 9-196 (2017). 

35  Puangmali, P., Jetdumronglerd, S., Wongratanaphisan, T. & Cole, M. O. Sensorless stepwise 

breakthrough detection technique for safe surgical drilling of bone. Mechatronics 65 , 102306 (2020). 

36  Violante, I. R. et al. Non -invasive tempora l interference electrical stimulation of the human 

hippocampus. Nature Neuroscience 26 , 1994 -2004 (2023).  https://doi.org:10.1038/s41593 -023 -

01456 -8

37  Wang, F., Jiang, M., Deng, D. & Tu, Y. Tempor al interference stimulation for human brain: 

Opportunities and challenges. The Innovation 6, 100803 (2025). 

https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xinn.2025.100803 

38  Srinivasan, R., Tucker, D. M. & Murias, M. Estimating the spatial Nyquist of the human EEG. Behavior 

Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers 30 , 8 -19 (1998).  https://doi.org:10.3758/BF03209412 

39  Nunez, P. L. & Sr inivasan, R. Electric Fields of the Brain: The neurophysics of EEG . (Oxford University 

Press, 2006). 

40  Wu, Q. et al. Impact response and energy absorption of human skull cellular bones. Journal of the 

Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials 81 , 106 -119 (2018). 

https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmbbm.2018.02.018 

41  Liao, S. et al. A Miniaturized Ultrasonic Micro -hole Perforator for Minimally Invasive Craniotomy. IEEE 

Tr ans Biomed Eng PP (2023).  https://doi.org:10.1109/TBME.2023.3234965 

42  Xiao, Y., Dong, H., Zhan, H. & Gu, Y. A New Particle Generation Method for Arbitrary 2D Geometries in 

SPH Modeling. Internation al Journal of Computational Methods 14 (2017). 

https://doi.org:10.1142/s0219876217500232 

43  Varatharajan, P. & Pandithevan, P. Bone drilling simulation using Johnson -Cook model combined with 

Cowper -Symonds model validated with in -vitro experiments. Mechanics of Advanced Materials and 

Structures 29 , 1 -11 (2021).  https://doi.org:10.1080/15376494.2021.1931994 

44  Santiuste, C., Rodríguez -Millá n, M., Giner, E. & Miguélez, H. The influence of anisotropy in numerical 

modeling of orthogonal cutting of cortical bone. Composite Structures 116 , 423 -431 (2014). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.14.738604 doi: bioRxiv preprint 31

https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compstruct.2014.05.031 

45  Li, Z. et al. Ultrasonic vibration -assisted micro -hole forming on skull. Proceedings of the Institution of 

Mechanical Engineers, Part B: Journal of Engineering Manufacture 231 , 2447 -2457 ( 2015). 

https://doi.org:10.1177/0954405415611363 

46  Tian, H., Dang, X., Meng, D., Tian, B. & Li, J. Influence of drilling parameters on bone drilling force and 

temperature by FE simulation and paramet ers optimization based Taguchi method. Alexandria 

Engineering Journal 75 , 115 -126 (2023).  https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aej.2023.05.048 

47  Davidson, S. R. & James, D. F. Drilling in bone: modeling heat generation and temperature distribution. 

J Biomech Eng 125 , 305 -314 (2003).  https://doi.org:10.1115/1.1535190 

48  Gupta, V., Pandey, P. M., Gupta, R. K. & Mridha, A. R. Rotary ultrasonic drilling on bone: A novel 

technique to put an end to thermal injury to bone. Proc Inst Mech Eng H 231 , 189 -196 (2017). 

https://doi.org:10.1177/0954411916688500 

49  Slutzky, M. W. et al. Op timal spacing of surface electrode arrays for brain -machine interface 

applications. J Neural Eng 7, 26004 (2010).  https://doi.org:10.1088/1741 -2560/7/2/026004 

50  Espinoza, S. G. & Thomas, H. C. R etinotopic organization of striate and extrastriate visual cortex in the 

hooded rat. Brain Res 272 , 137 -144 (1983).  https://doi.org:10.1016/0006 -8993(83)90370 -0

51  Stienen, P. J. et al. Evaluatio n of methods for eliciting somatosensory -evoked potentials in the awake, 

freely moving rat. J Neurosci Methods 126 , 79 -90 (2003).  https://doi.org:10.1016/s0165 -

0270(03)00070 -0

52  Sakatani, K., I izuka, H. & Young, W. Somatosensory evoked potentials in rat cerebral cortex before and 

after middle cerebral artery occlusion. Stroke 21 , 124 -132 (1990). 

https://doi.org:10.1161/01.str.21.1.124 

53  Bo ndar, A. & Shubina, L. Nonlinear reactions of limbic structure electrical activity in response to 

rhythmical photostimulation in guinea pigs. Brain Res Bull 143 , 73 -82 (2018). 

https://doi.org:10.1016/j.brainresbull.2018.10.002 

54  Li, X. et al. Evaluation of an online SSVEP -BCI with fast system setup. Journal of Neurorestoratology 12 ,

100122 (2024).  https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnrt.2024.100122 

55  Xu, P. et al. Cortical network properties revealed by SSVEP in anesthetized rats. Scientific reports 3,

2496 (2013).  https://doi.org:10.1038/srep02496 

56  Rampersad, S. et al. Prospects for transcranial temporal interference stimulation in humans: A 

computational study. NeuroImage 202 , 116124 (2019). 

https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116124 

57  Song, X. et al. in 2019 9th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering (NER). 770 -

773. 

58  Wenger, C., Salvador, R., Basser, P. J. & Miranda, P. C. Improving Tumor Treating Fields Treatment 

Efficacy in Patients With Glioblastoma Using Personalized Array Layouts. International Journal of 

Radiation Oncology*Biology*Physics 94 , 1137 -1143 (2016). 

https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrobp.2015.11.042 

59  Sun, Y. -S. Direct -Current Electric Field Distribution in the Brain for Tumor Treating Field Applications: A 

Simulatio n Study. Computational and Mathematical Methods in Medicine 2018 , 3829768 (2018). 

https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/3829768 

60  Grossman, N. et al. Noninvasive Deep Brain Stimul ation via Temporally Interfering Electric Fields. Cell 

169 , 1029 -1041.e1016 (2017).  https://doi.org:10.1016/j.cell.2017.05.024