Title: ARXIV

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.26579v1

Published Time: Fri, 26 Jun 2026 00:28:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
An exploratory behavioral and electroencephalographic study of artificial intelligence-assisted learning modes in high school students 

# (June 2026) 

KASHIKA KHURANA 1* , ALLY LIEW 1* 

> 1Allen High School, Allen, TX, 75013 USA
> Corresponding author: K. Khurana (e-mail: kashikakhurana26@gmail.com)

ABSTRACT As artificial intelligence (AI) is rapidly integrating into education, concerns have emerged regarding its potential implications on cognitive engagement and problem-solving behavior. However, existing research largely treats AI exposure as a binary condition (AI vs. no-AI), with limited differentiation between interaction modalities and post-exposure effects. This study investigates whether distinct AI interaction modes (Tutor, Collaborator, Solver) influence frontal EEG spectral activity. Electroencephalography (EEG) data and quantified behavioral metrics were recorded from 48 study participants (24 males, 24 females; ages 14–18) across two counterbalanced quizzes in a within-subject design. 

Statistical analyses included Friedman tests, repeated-measures ANOVA, paired t-tests, and effect size calculations. Behavioral changes were mathematically analyzed in an observation matrix of three characteristics – Initiation, Processing, and Stress – measured on an ordinal scale. Each mode showed significant differences in all three behavioral measures. Descriptive EEG patterns in AI interaction mode were observed and the possibility of short-term carry over effects of AI were explored. Although the EEG data did not reach statistical significance, the patterns observed across the three AI interaction modes may warrant further investigation. This study provides preliminary behavioral evidence and investigative electrophysiological observations, exploring possible AI-interaction-mode-based differences in neural activity and behavior, while establishing a replicable framework for future human-AI interaction studies. 

INDEX TERMS Cognitive neuroscience, Metacognition, Education, Artificial Intelligence, Problem-solving, EEG, Electroencephalography, Educational technology, Human-computer interaction 

## I.  INTRODUCTION 

The rapid development of Large Language Models 

(LLMs), such as Gemini AI, Claude AI, and ChatGPT, has 

fundamentally changed the way students learn and solve 

problems. In educational contexts, artificial intelligence 

(AI)-driven tools offer opportunities to enhance student 

engagement and personalize learning to the students’ 

needs. [1] However, the rise of artificial intelligence has 

also sparked debate regarding its impact on cognitive 

development in children. Despite the widespread adoption 

of AI, there remains a limited body of research concerning 

the neurological effects of these tools, particularly among 

high school learners. Recent research has begun to explore 

AI’s impact on cognition, but with a focus on higher 

education. For instance, a 2025 MIT Media Lab project 

report [2] found that university students relying on LLMs 

for essay composition exhibited significantly reduced 

neural connectivity and activation of brain networks 

compared to those engaged in independent writing. On the 

other hand, research published in Frontiers in Education 

suggests that AI can optimize learning effectiveness by 

promoting autonomous and interactive learning 

environments [3]. Additional studies on design students in 

Eastern China found that AI-generated content (AIGC) 

tools were associated with improved creative performance and concentration levels, as measured by 

electroencephalography (EEG) monitoring [1]. 

While these prior findings provide a foundational 

understanding of the implications of AI tools, several 

aspects remain to be tested. 

First, existing studies predominantly focus on 

university-level students, while leaving the impact on high 

school students largely unknown. High school students 

(ages 14-18) are a demographic that use AI as much as 

university students, but are at a more critical stage of 

cognitive development, making them a relevant population 

for studying potential cognitive effects of AI use. 

Second, most research treats AI use as a binary condition 

(use vs. non-use). There is little evidence on whether 

specific modes of AI interaction influence spectral 

dynamics differently. While the concern that AI use may 

reduce active learning over time due to decreased cognitive 

effort during academic tasks [1] poses validity, AI use is 

not uniform across students. Additionally, current research 

often isolates single learning styles (e.g., only writing), 

failing to account for the multifaceted cognitive processes 

students employ daily, such as math, writing, 

comprehension, and innovation. 

Consequently, it remains difficult to determine whether AI 

use absolutely diminishes learning-related neural 

engagement or whether its impact depends on how it is 

used. 

This pilot exploratory study seeks to investigate two 

primary objectives: (1) whether varied AI interaction 

modes are associated with differences in behavioral 

measures and frontal EEG activity, and (2) whether AI 

exposure may create a short-term effect on oscillatory 

activity in subsequent independent problem-solving. 

To increase ecological validity, this research utilizes a 

consumer-grade EEG headset (SereniBrain EEG 

Neurofeedback Headband Model TH21A), providing 

minimal disruption to a student’s typical learning, relative 

to laboratory-grade EEG systems. This headset may also 

reveal the potential for a scalable, low-cost type of 

monitoring in classroom environments. 

The implications of this work are significant for both 

educational policy and software development. By 

identifying whether different AI interaction modes are 

associated with distinct behavioral and electrophysiological 

patterns, this study can inform discussions regarding AI 

integration into educational curricula and aid engineers to 

develop artificial intelligence that serves as a cognitive aid 

rather than a replacement for independent thought. 

## II.  EXPERIMENTAL AI INTERACTION MODES 

Because no common taxonomy exists that strictly defines 

different AI interaction types, this study creates and utilizes 

three measurable “modes” for human-AI interaction based 

on recurring AI-interaction patterns found in educational 

settings. These modes seek to operationally define the three 

distinct use cases students often adopt to provide 

experimentally controllable conditions. 

Tutor mode: High learner contribution, low AI guidance. 

AI provides Socratic prompting and hints, but is restricted 

from providing final solutions. This mode requires the 

student to remain in control and produce the final output 

independently. 

Collaborator mode: Shared contribution between learner 

and AI. 

AI collaborates with the student to brainstorm ideas and 

complete specific tasks. This represents an interactive 

cognitive state where executive control fluctuates between 

the human and the AI model. 

Solver mode: Low learner contribution, high AI guidance. 

AI provides the solution with no student input. The student 

may rely fully on the externally generated response. 

## III.  QUIZZES 

Each participant completes two similar difficulty, parallel 

structure quizzes with three task blocks corresponding to 

rotating AI interaction modes. Each of the three task blocks 

test a unique cognitive method (convergent, divergent, and 

analytical), with one “with-AI” question and one 

“without-AI” question. 

AI modes randomly rotate between task blocks to prevent 

any order effects. 

For example, Participant #1 may have the order Tutor, 

Collaborator, Solver, Participant #2 may have the order 

Collaborator, Solver, Tutor, while Participant #3 has the 

order Solver, Tutor, Collaborator. 

Participants were randomly assigned to one of these three 

orders and researchers ensured that each of the three 

potential orders had 12 participants each (48 participants 

total). 

Quizzes were designed to assess convergent, analytical, 

and divergent thinking across math, reading, and 

open-ended problem-solving tasks. Questions were 

formatted similarly to questions found on the Scholastic Assessment Test (SAT) and standardized language tests 

under the advice of high school math and English teachers. 

Quizzes used (Quiz A and Quiz B) were as follows: 

## FIGURE 1.  Quiz A given to all 48 participants. Note that the 

> without-AI questions are before the with-AI questions in all three
> thinking types (convergent, analytical, and divergent).

## FIGURE 2.  Quiz B given to all 48 participants. Note that the 

> with-AI questions are before the without-AI questions in all three
> thinking types (convergent, analytical, and divergent).

## IV.  RESEARCH QUESTIONS 

The research goals defined above were divided into three 

components, each seeking to analyze a different aspect of 

the quizzes. 

Part I: Do distinct behavioral patterns emerge when 

students use AI as a Tutor, vs. Collaborator vs. Solver? 

Part II: Does frontal oscillatory activity differ when AI is 

used as a Tutor, vs. Collaborator vs. Solver? 

Part III : Does AI-interaction leave a temporal carryover 

effect on engagement-related oscillatory activity? 

## V.  HYPOTHESES: 

Part I : Participants will demonstrate distinct behavioral 

cues in each AI mode. Tutor and Collaborator modes are 

hypothesized to stimulate behavioral patterns related to 

processing and stress, while Solver mode may promote 

characteristics of idleness in the participants. 

Part II : EEG analyses were conducted in an exploratory 

nature to see if each mode of AI interaction will be associated with differing patterns of frontal EEG 

oscillatory activity, compared to a no-AI baseline condition 

and across AI conditions. No confirmatory hypotheses are 

made regarding directionality due to the exploratory 

nature. 

Frontal activity is operationalized using EEG signals 

recorded from frontal electrode sites (e.g., Fp1, Fp2, Fpz). 

Signals will undergo standard preprocessing, including 

bandpass filtering and artifact rejection prior to spectral 

analysis. 

Power spectral density (PSD) will be estimated using 

Welch’s method, and band power will be computed as 

relative spectral power (band power normalized to total 

power across 0.5-40 Hz), in order to reduce skewness. 

Part III : EEG spectral activity was explored to see if the 

immediate post-AI task period will exhibit differing 

short-term frontal oscillatory activity, relative to a

pre-exposure baseline. No confirmatory hypotheses are 

made regarding directionality due to the exploratory 

nature. 

## VI.  VARIABLES 

Part I & II: 

Independent variable: 

● AI mode (Tutor, Solver, Collaborator) 

Dependent variable: 

● I: Qualitative behavioral observations (Initiation, 

Processing, Stress) 

● II: Neurological observations: frontal EEG 

spectral activity (brain waves recorded: Delta, 

Theta, Alpha, Beta, Gamma, and the sensorimotor 

rhythm [SMR]) 

Part III: 

Independent variable: 

● Quiz type 

○ Quiz A: independent solving first, then 

with-AI problems 

○ Quiz B: with-AI problems first, then 

independent solving 

Dependent variable: 

● Changes in frontal EEG spectral activity (brain 

waves recorded: Delta, Theta, Alpha, Beta, 

Gamma, and the sensorimotor rhythm) 

Constants: 

● LLM (ChatGPT) 

○ ChatGPT’s temporary chat used for all 

● Headband (EEG biofeedback headband 

manufactured by SereniBrain) 

○ Sanitized the dry electrodes using 

isopropyl alcohol-based technical wipes 

after each use 

● Baseline recording time for each quiz (1 min) 

● Solving time for each quiz (12 mins) 

● Solving time for each question (2 min) 

● AI prompts for each mode (See Section VIII) 

● 0.5 mm ballpoint pen as writing utensil 

● Quizzes (A and B) 

● Testing environment (indoors, standardized light, 

consistent table and chair set up, minimized noise, 

stable room temperature (75 ℉)

● Laptop Consistency: M3 MacBook, screen size, 

resolution, and keyboard used for all participants 

● Instructions given 

● No caffeine intake in the last 10 hours 

Counterbalance variable: 

● Order of quizzes given -to control for order effects 

such as fatigue and reliance (24 participants take 

Quiz A first and 24 take Quiz B first). 

## VII.  HUMAN PARTICIPANTS 

Composition: 48 high school students (24 males, 24 

females; ages 14-18) were recruited for this study. 

Participants were also drawn from an academically 

uniform cohort (weighted GPA of 4.0+, minimum of one 

AP/IB class) to minimize contextual variability in 

academic performance that may alter interactions with AI. 

All participants self-reported having used AI on a daily 

basis for at least two years. 

To reduce potential variability in language-processing 

backgrounds during text-based interaction tasks, 

participant selection was composed solely of bilingual 

students (English and another language both self-reported 

as first languages, having learned from birth). [See section 

XIX for a detailed explanation]. 

Participant demographics are as follows: 

## FIGURE 3.  Participant demographic. Ratios represent a 

> sample from the largest public high school in Texas, USA.

Although ethnicity was not used as a recruitment criterion, 

all participants in the final volunteer sample self-identified 

as Asian. 

Informed consent was obtained from all participants and 

their legal guardians (as they were minors). The research plan was approved by the Allen High School Institutional 

Review Board (IRB) prior to data collection. 

## VIII.  AI PROMPTS BY MODE 

All prompting sessions were executed in temporary 

ChatGPT sessions (version used being GPT-5 Instant) 

using the standardized prompt templates below to 

minimize variations in responses. 

> TABLE 1. AI PROMPTS BY MODE

Tutor  Only steps to 

solving 

given. 

Answer is 

provided in 

iterative 

statements. 

You are a tutor helping 

the student learn how to 

solve the problem. Do 

NOT give the final 

answer. 

Instead: 

• explain relevant 

concepts 

• ask guiding questions 

• help the student reason 

through the steps 

Your goal is to help the 

student think through the 

solution themselves. 

Collaborator  Possible 

starting 

points given, 

LLM sets 

broad scope 

of answer and 

bullets/guidin 

g questions 

given. 

You are a collaborator 

working together with 

the student. Explain the 

reasoning or approach to 

solving this problem. No 

need for step by step. 

Give the final answer. 

Solver  Answer fully 

given. 

Prompt 

corresponds 

to direct 

output. 

You are a solver 

answering the problem 

for the student. Provide 

the full solution. Don’t 

explain how it was 

obtained. 

## IX.  EEG SPECIFICATIONS 

1.  The device used for experimentation was the 

SereniBrain EEG Neurofeedback Headband 

(Model TH21A). This headband was fitted using 

the International 10-20 system for electrode 

placement, in which electrodes are placed at either 

10% or 20% intervals of the skull’s measured 

distance [4]. 

Active biopotential data was collected from two 

sites: 

○ Fp1: Frontopolar 1 (left side of the 

forehead). 

○ Fp2: Frontopolar 2 (right side of the 

forehead). 

Initial common-mode rejection and differential 

potential tracking were achieved via a shared 

central reference electrode at one site: 

○ Fpz: Frontopolar midline (center of the 

forehead). 

The band monitored the frontal lobe region and 

was placed on the student in accordance with 

manual instructions (power button aligned with 

bridge of the nose and lower edge of the band 

placed immediately above eyebrows) to ensure 

stable contact over the targeted 10-20 coordinates. 

2.  Technical Specifications: 

○ Sampling Rate: 256 Hz 

○ Resolution: 12 to 14 bits per sample 

○ Electrode Type: Dry surface biopotential 

sensors to reduce preparation friction 

while maintaining continuous structural 

contact 

○ Raw Data Units: Raw voltage 

fluctuations were recorded in microvolts 

( ). μ𝑉 

○ Data Bandwidth: Captures standard EEG 

frequency bands (delta, theta, alpha, beta, 

gamma, and SMR) [5] 

3.  The digital signal processing (DSP) pipeline used 

involved three primary stages: 

○ Artifact Suppression: Signal conditioning 

includes notch filtering (50/60 Hz) for 

power-line interference and band-pass 

filtering (0.5 - 40 Hz) to retain 

conventional EEG frequency ranges 

while attenuating background 

physiological noise [6]. 

○ Signal Referencing: A common-mode 

rejection strategy is applied by 

calculating differential potentials 

between the frontopolar active sites and 

the central reference electrode (Fpz) to 

cancel shared environmental noise. 

○ Feature Extraction: Signals are 

segmented into discrete epochs for Fast 

Fourier Transform (FFT) analysis. This 

allowed spectral power estimation across 

standard frequency bands [7]. 

To prevent impacts to the pipeline from macro-movements, 

a real-time contact-quality evaluation was performed via 

the device’s integrated software interface immediately prior to and during experimental trials to confirm baseline 

data-stream stability. 

Because the dry-sensor technology lacks the 

alternating-current circuitry required to calculate exact 

laboratory skin-electrode impedance, contact integrity is 

monitored continuously through automated mathematical 

tracking of the incoming voltage time-series. The 

integrated software monitors the stream of data for 

irregularities, looking for signal saturation, electrical 

clipping, or abrupt dropouts. Any data exhibiting these 

unphysiological voltage spikes or a prolonged loss of 

contact with the skin are removed by the system, removing 

signal segments with detected artifacts in the final dataset. 

## X.  METHODOLOGY 

1) Data Collection 

1.  Participants were seated and fitted with a 

non ‑invasive EEG headset in accordance with 

electrical safety standards for EEG [8] and manual 

instructions. Signal quality was checked prior to 

data collection. All procedures were conducted 

under standardized testing conditions as described 

in Section VI. 

2.  Prior to seeing the quizzes, a 60-second baseline 

EEG recording was collected for each participant 

to control for individual differences in resting 

neural activity. 

3.  Participants first completed either Quiz A or Quiz 

B (see section III) for 12 minutes while 

researchers noted behavioral observations using a 

predefined standardized rubric. (Refer to section 

XIII) 

4.  This procedure was repeated for a second quiz (12 

min, either Quiz B or Quiz A), which reverses the 

with-AI and without-AI questions to reduce 

potential order effects and improve internal 

validity. 

2) Data Processing 

1.  All 96 recordings were offloaded from the 

SereniBrain data collection application and 

imported into Kaggle as CSV files. Our 

time-series data reports values for gamma, beta, 

alpha, SMR, theta, and delta waves by every 

80ms. Our raw exported experimental recordings 

are categorized by participants and are made to be 

openly available at the following web URL. (Note 

that data sharing consent forms collected from 

participants and their parents). 

https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/allyliew/particip 

ant-data 

2.  Data cleaning performed, artifacts (eye blinks and 

head movement contamination) removed, and 

data z-scored for in-depth analysis. [See Section 

XI] 

3) Behavioral Data Analysis 

1.  Each participant’s behavior scored individually by 

both researchers. 

2.  Inter-rater reliability tests performed 

3.  Behavioral metrics defined by mode. [See Section 

XIII] 

4) EEG Data Analysis 

1.  Neural activity was later segmented into epochs 

corresponding to task engagement periods for data 

analysis. 

2.  Artifact removal performed on EEG data. 

3.  Data standardized and baseline z-scored. 

4.  Using Python libraries [9], brain wave changes, 

carryover effects, and engagement-related metric 

differences across quiz questions and AI modes 

were analyzed. 

5.  Standard EEG waveforms were identified 

according to established principles [10]. 

Alpha waves (8–12 Hz) were monitored for relaxation 

[11], while Beta waves (13–30 Hz) served as the primary 

indicator of active focus [12]. Theta (4-8 Hz) activity was 

analyzed to assess internal focus [13]. Gamma (31-40 Hz) 

was monitored for high-level executive processing [14]. 

Additionally, cross-frequency coupling between Beta and 

Gamma bands was utilized to assess functional neural 

integration [15]. 

5) Statistical Analysis 

1.  Behavioral measures (Initiation, Processing, 

Stress) were designated as the primary endpoints 

and evaluated for differences across AI interaction 

modes. Statistical tests included using a Friedman 

test, followed by Wilcoxon signed-rank post-hoc 

comparisons with Holm–Bonferroni correction. 

2.  EEG spectral measures were used as secondary 

exploratory outcomes. A one-way 

repeated-measures ANOVA was used to assess 

overall differences across conditions. EEG results 

were not subjected to post-hoc inference due to a 

lack of significant omnibus effects. Accordingly, EEG findings are reported in descriptive form 

without correction-based inference. 

3.  Statistical analysis was performed using the 

statsmodels (v0.14.0) and scipy (v1.11.0) libraries 

in Python. Repeated Measures ANOVA 

(AnovaRM) was utilized to account for the 

within-subject design [see section XI for in depth 

information]. 

## XI.  DATA PROCESSING 

## A.  ARTIFACT REMOVAL 

Since EEG recordings are susceptible to substantial 

physiological and environmental noise, the data was first 

cleaned for artifacts (such as muscle movements and 

blinks) that could cause large spikes in oscillatory 

dynamics [16]. To preserve the reproducibility and 

efficiency required for classroom settings, a targeted 

interquartile range (IQR) artifact rejection algorithm was 

chosen over computationally intensive blind source 

separation techniques (e.g., ICA). 

(1) 𝐼𝑄𝑅 = 𝑄 3 − 𝑄 1

(2) 𝐿𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑 = 𝑄 1 − 1. 5(𝐼𝑄𝑅) 

(3) 𝑈𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟 𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑 = 𝑄 3 + 1. 5(𝐼𝑄𝑅) 

By using the interquartile range and the upper and lower 

bounds found, any data that exceeded those ranges could 

be removed. This process controlled for random high 

spikes in data resulting from artifacts [5]. 

Additionally, the raw voltages were smoothed and 

averaged over a larger window with a simple moving 

average equation (SMA) – a common preprocessing 

technique used to reduce high-frequency signal noise and 

improve signal stability prior to downstream analysis. 

(4) 𝑆𝑀𝐴 𝑡 = 1𝑊 𝑖=0 𝑊−1 

∑ 𝑥 𝑡−𝑖 

The simple moving average (SMA) was taken over a 

window (W) size of five rows to balance noise reduction 

with signal preservation. This prevents notable temporal 

patterns from being excessively smoothed. 

## B.  BASELINE NORMALIZATION 

Baseline z-score normalization was performed to scale 

each participant’s data to their own baseline-resting 

cognitive state (obtained from the one minute baseline 

recording). This allowed for accurate cross-participant 

comparisons by looking at average standard deviations 

from the mean instead of raw values. 

(5) 𝑧 = 𝑥−μ 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 

> σ𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒

The z value was calculated by taking the raw EEG voltage 

at any given time (x) and subtracting it from the 

participant’s average resting voltage ( ) and then μ𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 

dividing the result by the standard deviation of the resting 

voltage (  ). σ𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 

## C.  LEVENE’S TEST 

Levene's test was performed to ensure homogeneity of 

variances across all AI modes. 

(6) 𝑊 = (𝑁−𝑘) (𝑘−1)  

> 𝑖=1 𝑘
> ∑ 𝑁 𝑖 (𝑍 𝑖. −𝑍 .. )2𝑖=1 𝑘
> ∑𝑗=1 𝑁 𝑖
> ∑ (𝑍 𝑖𝑗 −𝑍 𝑖. )2

The raw data was transformed by calculating the absolute 

deviation ( ) for each data point, representing the 𝑍 𝑖𝑗 

distance between a value and its respective group’s median. 

These deviations were then utilized as a new dataset to 

conduct a one-way ANOVA. The variance between the 

four AI conditions (k) – calculated using the group sizes ( 

), group mean deviations ( ), and the grand mean 𝑁 𝑖  𝑍 𝑖. 

deviation (  ) – was compared against the variance within 𝑍 .. 

the groups. A resulting W statistic with a non-significant 

p-value indicated that the spread of data was uniform 

across the conditions, confirming the assumption of 

homogeneity of variance. 

## D.  ONE-WAY REPEATED MEASURES ANOVA 

A one-way repeated measures ANOVA was conducted to 

evaluate whether statistically significant differences in 

neural activity existed across the three AI interaction 

modes (Tutor, Collaborator, Solver) within the same 

participants. 

(7) 𝐹 = 𝑀𝑆 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 

> 𝑀𝑆 𝐸𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟

(8) 𝑆𝑆 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 = 𝑆𝑆 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 + 𝑆𝑆 𝑆𝑢𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡 + 𝑆𝑆 𝐸𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟 

The F-statistic represents the ratio of variance between the 

experimental manipulation and the unexplained 

within-subject variability. 

Total variability ( was partitioned to reflect 𝑆𝑆 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 )

differences between AI modes, individual baseline 

variance, and unexplained residual variation. This method of isolating within-subject changes increases statistical 

accuracy as brain wave activity becomes independent of 

inter-individual variability. 

## E.  PAIRED COHEN’S D 

(9) 𝑑 𝑧 = 𝑥 𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓 

> 𝑠 𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓

For within-subject comparisons (AI vs. no-AI), paired 

Cohen's d was calculated.  represents the average 𝑥 𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓 

difference between conditions for each participant, and 

represents the standard deviation of those differences. 𝑠 𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓 

This approach accounts for repeated measurements 

obtained from the same individuals across conditions, 

making it more appropriate than independent-sample effect 

size calculations for within-subject experimental designs. 

Effect sizes (d) were interpreted using conventional 

thresholds, where d ≈ 0.2 indicates a small effect, d ≈ 0.5 a 

medium effect, and d ≈ 0.8 a large effect. In addition, 95% 

confidence intervals were considered to evaluate the 

precision and stability of the estimated effects. In this 

study, paired Cohen’s d was used to quantify the magnitude 

of AI-related changes in neural activity within individuals, 

providing a complementary measure of practical 

significance beyond p-values alone [17]. 

## XII.  STATISTICAL TEST RESULTS 

> TABLE 2. SIGNIFICANCE TESTING

Test  Result  Impact 

Paired t-test 

(AI vs. 

no-AI) 

p-value = 0.823 > 

0.05 

Cohen’s d = 

-0.037 

No significant 

differences were 

observed between the 

with-AI and no-AI 

conditions, as a 

negative effect size 

emerged. 

One-Way 

Repeated 

Measures 

ANOVA 

p-values (across 

all six bands*) > 

0.29 

Stable p-value failed 

to reject the null 

hypothesis. This 

means no statistically 

significant 

differences observed 

across AI modes. 

Paired t-test 

(Quiz A vs. 

Quiz B) 

p-values (across 

all six bands**) > 

0.20 

Cohen’s d = 0.11 

Non-significant 

variance between the 

results potentially 

due to the parallel 

structuring of 

quizzes. 

Levene’s 

Test (for 

variance 

stability) 

p-values (across 

all six bands***) 

> 0.53 

Variance 

homogeneity 

assumption satisfied. 

> EXTENDED VALUES FOR EACH BRAIN WAVE BAND
> (corresponds to asterisks on Table 1)

*One-way repeated measures ANOVA band values 

Gamma F = 0.85,  p = 0.4688  [ns] 

Beta:  F = 1.26,  p = 0.2911  [ns] 

Alpha:  F = 0.63,  p = 0.5953  [ns] 

Theta:  F = 0.70,  p = 0.5523  [ns] 

Delta:  F = 1.00,  p = 0.3942  [ns] 

SMR:  F = 0.98,  p = 0.4037  [ns] 

**Paired t-test band values 

Gamma:t = -1.30,  p = 0.2007  d = -0.19 

[ns] 

Beta:  t = 0.75,  p = 0.4597  d = 0.11 

[ns] 

Alpha:  t = 0.52,  p = 0.6082  d = 0.08 

[ns] 

Theta:  t = 0.09,  p = 0.9289  d = 0.01 

[ns] 

Delta:  t = 1.12,  p = 0.2704  d = 0.16 

[ns] 

SMR:  t = -1.01,  p = 0.3173  d = -0.15 

[ns] 

***Levene’s test band values 

Gamma: p = 0.7071  [Stable (Equal Variance)] 

Beta:  p = 0.5269  [Stable (Equal Variance)] 

Alpha:  p = 0.6153  [Stable (Equal Variance)] 

Theta:  p = 0.6140  [Stable (Equal Variance)] 

Delta:  p = 0.8158  [Stable (Equal Variance)] 

SMR:  p = 0.7528  [Stable (Equal Variance)] 

## XIII.  BEHAVIORAL RESULTS 

Compared to the EEG results, behavioral tests yielded 

highly significant differences between the three AI 

interaction modes. 

A structured, blinded behavioral observation matrix was 

deployed to capture real-time human-factors dynamics. 

Behavioral execution was quantified across three 

operationalized dimensions using discrete behavioral 

metrics. These metrics were calculated using only the 

observations from the with-AI questions. 

1.  Initiation: Indication of individual processing 

before AI input based on duration in seconds 

between viewing the quiz question and beginning 

to use the AI model. 

2.  Processing: Indication of thinking based on the 

number of pauses in between writing/solving. 3.  Stress: Indication of stress based on the number of 

distinct adjustments associated with high overload 

or frustration. 

To ensure the objectivity of the behavioral observations 

and eliminate bias, researchers scored each participant 

independently of each other. The real-time frontal EEG 

spectral data streams were also not viewed during 

behavioral analysis to mitigate potential biases. 

Students were each given a score from zero to two (with 

zero equaling less of the behavior and two equaling more 

of the behavior as observed) 

These scores were assigned based on the following 

guidelines: 

Initiation: 

● 0 = Immediately uses AI (no attempt to solve 

independently) 

● 1 = Brief attempt (<3 sec of individual 

processing) 

● 2 = Clear attempt (>3 sec writes/thinks before AI) 

Processing: 

● 0 = No pauses while working 

● 1 = Some pauses while working (1–3 times) 

● 2 = Frequent pauses while working (3+ times) 

Stress: 

Participants were scored based on the number of times 

these indicators of stress were observed [18]: 

1.  Fidgeting: Tapping foot, drumming fingers, 

tapping a pencil, or shifting in seat 

2.  Sighing: observed stress reducing behavior 

3.  Micro-movements: Picking at skin around fingers, 

lip chewing, hair twirling, or teeth grinding/ jaw 

clenching. 

Stress score: 

● 0 = No signs of stress 

● 1 = 1–3 signs of stress 

● 2 = 3+ indicators of stress 

Thresholds were selected a priori to standardize 

observational coding and maintain consistency across 

raters. To ensure statistical reliability, behavioral timelines 

were independently scored by two researchers (R1 and R2) 

according to the above standardized rubric, yielding high 

inter-rater consensus before being subjected to 

non-parametric Friedman and Wilcoxon signed-rank 

testing. 

Inter-Rater Reliability Analysis : Inter-rater reliability 

(IRR) was quantified across all 144 behavioral scores (48 

participants across three distinct operational modes), 

resulting in  = 432 paired metric observations across the 𝑁 

three evaluation dimensions (Initiation, Processing, and 

Stress). The macro-level analysis demonstrated exceptional 

consensus between the two researchers, achieving an 

overall percent agreement of 96.30% (416 out of 432 exact 

matches) and an overall Cohen's kappa coefficient (  ) of κ

0.9422, which denotes near-perfect agreement under 

standard benchmarking criteria. High agreement likely 

reflects the use of behaviorally explicit scoring criteria 

consisting of counting. 

The mathematical formulations utilized for verification are 

defined as follows: 

## F.  PERCENT AGREEMENT: The proportion of 

times both evaluators gave the same score for the same 

metric. 

(10) 𝑃 𝑜 = 𝑖=1 𝑀  

> ∑ 𝐼(𝑅 1𝑖 = 𝑅 2𝑖 )𝑁

where  is an indicator function equal to 1 if the ratings 𝐼 

match and 0 otherwise, and  represents the total number 𝑁 

of paired observations. 

## G.  COHEN’S KAPPA: To control for agreements 

occurring strictly by chance, the kappa statistic was 

computed via: 

(11) κ = 𝑃 𝑜 − 𝑃 𝑒 

> 1 − 𝑃 𝑒

where  represents the hypothetical probability of chance 𝑃 𝑒 

agreement, derived from the marginal totals of the 

confusion matrix: 

(12) 𝑃 𝑒 = 𝑘=0 𝐾 

∑ 𝑃 1𝑘 𝑃 2𝑘 

and  are the independent marginal probabilities of 𝑃 1𝑘  𝑃 2𝑘 

assigning score category  for R1 and R2, respectively. 𝐾 

Given the ordinal structure of the rubric, weighted Cohen’s 

kappa coefficients were additionally computed to account 

for disagreement severity between adjacent scoring 

categories. Granular inter-rater reliability metrics were 

extracted for each behavioral metric: 

● Initiation: 96.53% agreement,  = 0.9421, 𝐾 

weighted  = 0.9703 𝐾 ● Processing: 93.75% agreement,  = 0.9060, 𝐾 

weighted  = 0.8671 𝐾 

● Stress: 98.61% agreement,  = 0.9774, weighted 𝐾 

= .9880 𝐾 

These statistically high (almost 1) indices confirm that the 

standardized behavioral rubric minimized subjectivity and 

provided a robust foundation for subsequent 

non-parametric inference testing. 

## FIGURE 4.  After ensuring high inter-rater reliability, 

> behavioral averages across all three AI modes across three parameters
> (Initiation, Processing, and Stress) were plotted. See below for
> signi fi cance across groups. Scores can be accessed via this Kaggle
> dataset:
> https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/kashikakhurana/ally-liew-r1-and-ka
> shika-khurana-r2-behavioral-data

To evaluate the differences in Initiation, Processing, and 

stress, a non-parametric Friedman test was conducted 

separately for each behavioral dimension. Because the 

Initiation, Processing, and Stress scores are ordinal, and 

our study uses a repeated-measures design (where the same 

participants test all three interaction modes), parametric 

assumptions of normality are not met. Therefore, the 

Friedman test, a non-parametric alternative to the one-way 

repeated measures ANOVA, was implemented [19]. 

The Friedman test statistic is calculated using the following 

formula: 

(13) 𝑋 2𝐹 (2) = 12 𝑁𝑘(𝑘+1) 𝑗=1 𝑘 

∑ 𝑅 2𝑗 − 3𝑁(𝑘 + 1) 

where  is the number of participants (  = 48),  is the 𝑁  𝑁  𝑘 

number of conditions (  = 3), and  represents the sum of 𝑘  𝑅 𝑗 

ranks for each condition  . To quantify the magnitude of 𝑗 

the overall treatment effect, Kendall’s  was calculated as 𝑊 

an effect size, where values closer to 1 indicate perfect 

agreement in rankings across participants. 

Specifically: 

= chi-square statistic 𝑋 2

= Friedman version of chi-square 𝐹 

(2) = degrees of freedom, because: 

(14) 𝑑𝑓 = 𝑘 − 1 = 3 − 1 = 2 

where  = 3 conditions. 𝑘 

The analysis revealed highly significant differences across 

modes for Initiation (  = 12.88, p = 0.0016, Kendall’s 𝑋 𝐹 2(2) 

= 0.134), Processing ( = 38.57, p < 0.0001, 𝑊  𝑋 𝐹 2(2) 

Kendall’s  = 0.402), and Stress (  = 21.80, p < 𝑊  𝑋 𝐹 2(2) 

0.0001, Kendall’s  = 0.227). These findings indicate that 𝑊 

the selected AI interaction paradigm significantly 

influenced participant behavior patterns. 

Because significant Friedman test results indicate only 

global differences without identifying which specific 

modes differ from one another, post-hoc pairwise 

comparisons were conducted using the Wilcoxon 

signed-rank test [20]. Given the moderate sample size (  =𝑁 

48 > 20), the normal approximation (  -score) of the 𝑍 

Wilcoxon statistic was utilized for effect size estimation. 

Holm-Bonferroni adjustment was additionally applied to 

control the family-wise error rate. Reported p-values 

reflect Holm-Bonferroni-adjusted significance testing. 

Post-hoc pairwise comparisons using the Wilcoxon 

signed-rank test were calculated using the following 

equation: 

(15) 𝑍 = 𝑇 − 𝑁 𝑟 (𝑁 𝑟 +1) 4𝑁 𝑟 (𝑁 𝑟 +1)(𝑁 𝑟 +2) 24 −

> ∑(𝑡 𝑖 3−𝑡 𝑖 )48

where T represents the sum of signed ranks,  is the 𝑁 𝑟 

number of non-zero differences, and  denotes the size of 𝑡 𝑖 

tied rank groups. To quantify the magnitude of pairwise 

behavioral difference, effect size  is calculated using: (𝑟) 

(16) 𝑟 = 𝑍 𝑁 

where  = normalized test statistic from the Wilcoxon 𝑍 

signed-rank test, and  = number of paired observations. 𝑁 

Initiation showed no significant difference when 

comparing Tutor and Collaborator modes (  = -0.956, p = 𝑍 

0.439, r = 0.138), suggesting these two modes trigger 

similar styles of Initiation prior to AI utilization. However, 

significant differences were identified between Tutor and 

Solver (  = -2.818, p = 0.0048, r = 0.407) and between 𝑍 

Collaborator and Solver modes (  = -3.836, p < 0.001, r = 𝑍 

0.554), showcasing substantially reduced independent Initiation during Solver interactions. 

Secondly, Processing behavior differed significantly across 

all pairwise comparisons. Tutor mode produced 

significantly greater Processing activity than Collaborator 

mode (  = -3.374, p < 0.001, r = 0.487) and Solver mode ( 𝑍 

= -4.306, p < 0.0001, r = 0.622). Collaborator mode also 𝑍 

demonstrated significantly greater Processing behavior 

than Solver mode (  = -3.793, p < 0.001, r = 0.547). 𝑍 

Finally, Stress levels also varied significantly between 

modes. Tutor mode demonstrated significantly higher 

stress-related behaviors than Collaborator mode ( =𝑍 

-3.909, p < 0.001, r = 0.564) and Solver mode (  = -3.113, 𝑍 

p = 0.0019, r = 0.449). No statistically significant 

difference was identified between Collaborator and Solver 

modes (  = -0.215, p = 0.829, r = 0.031). It is important to 𝑍 

note that these Stress indicators represent observational 

proxies of cognitive overload rather than direct 

physiological measurements of stress. 

## XIV.  EXPLORATORY EEG RESULTS 

The behavioral results from above outline the strongest 

findings from our study. The EEG results below provide 

exploratory trends that aim to motivate investigation into 

the causes behind the patterns discovered. However, 

because of the non-significance of the data and low 

channel set up, they should be seen as preliminary trends 

without inferential interpretation. 

## FIGURE 5.  Master graph of all six EEG bands (gamma, beta, 

> SMR, alpha, theta, delta) across no-AI, Tutor mode, Collaborator mode,
> and Solver mode.

An EEG measures electrophysiological differences using 

established band values seen in Figure 5. Figure 5 offers a 

descriptive idea into how AI interaction modes may affect 

oscillatory activity differently. Conclusions were found 

using an exploratory visual inspection as outlined below. 

When comparing each AI mode with the control or 

balanced cognitive state of no-AI (None), Tutor mode 

displayed the most consistent oscillatory dynamics with the 

no-AI condition. 

In this study, gamma and beta increases were recorded in 

Collaborator mode. Gamma and beta waves can be 

associated with active processing and focus, but the rise in 

gamma and beta through Collaborator mode is not 

necessarily an indication of this cognitive reaction due to 

the limited abilities of the headset. 

Finally, all waves were observed to have risen except for 

gamma in Solver mode. Increases in alpha, theta, and delta 

activity alongside reduced gamma activity are theoretically 

consistent with patterns of cognitive offloading hypotheses 

as reported in prior literature [21]. However, whether the 

pattern in Solver mode represents cognitive offloading or 

not cannot be determined from this study alone. 

Although these inferential conclusions did not reveal 

significant differences between modes, the descriptive 

oscillatory trends suggest potential mode-dependent 

processing variations warranting further investigation. 

## FIGURE 6.  Residual e ff ects of AI across quiz A and quiz B 

When participants completed Quiz A first, a slight decrease 

in beta and gamma from the initial no-AI condition to the 

later with-AI condition was observed, but not enough to 

produce a significant change in engagement-related EEG 

metrics. 

This trend did become more prominent in Quiz B, where 

completing the AI question first displayed descriptively 

lower beta and gamma activity when students worked 

without AI afterwards. It cannot be concluded from this 

study that these trends reflect a carryover effect from AI 

due to the non-significance of the data, but it does reveal a 

topic worth researching further. FIGURE 7.  Beta-gamma coupling across none/no-AI, Tutor        

> mode, Collaborator mode, and Solver mode. P-value (no-AI): 0.177,
> p-value (Tutor): 0.1553, p-value (Collaborator): 0.4787, p-value
> (Solver): 0.8917

Prior literature has associated beta-gamma coupling with 

information integration and executive processing [15]. 

Although the beta-gamma relationships in this experiment 

differed descriptively across conditions, none of these 

correlations reached statistical significance (p > 0.15). 

With these current, non-significant results, only descriptive 

patterns can be interpreted to produce exploratory rather 

than confirmatory conclusions. 

The no-AI mode served as a baseline model of spectral 

dynamics where both beta and gamma waves rise together. 

Although not numerically significant, a descriptively 

stronger positive beta-gamma relationship was observed in 

Tutor mode. A positive correlation between beta and 

gamma can indicate greater coordination between 

high-frequency oscillatory activity, but it cannot be 

determined from this study if greater coordination is what 

is actually occurring. 

An opposite pattern where beta and gamma were 

negatively correlated was measured in Collaborator mode. 

Due to the non-significance of the data, the possibility of a 

shift in the brain’s information-processing dynamics cannot 

be confirmed but may spark future investigation. 

Solver mode displayed a flat line, where beta increases but 

gamma does not increase. This pattern is typically 

associated with weaker beta-gamma coupling and could 

warrant further investigation. However, it cannot be 

concluded that this represents cognitive offloading. 

The beta-gamma plots reveal preliminary correlation 

patterns that may provide useful directions for future 

research on how AI interaction modes relate to attention 

and information integration. They suggest that 

cross-frequency relationships may be worth examining in 

larger studies with higher-density EEG recordings. 

## FIGURE 8.  Engagement index values between Quiz A and        

> Quiz B across all three modes: Tutor Context (Math): p-value: 0.8555 |
> Collaborator Context (Writing): p-value: 0.8649 |Solver Context
> (Innovation): p-value: 0.6792

“Engagement” was measured and quantified using an 

engagement index as an ad hoc exploratory metric. 

The engagement index [22] was calculated and averaged 

for all 48 participants using the following equation: 

(17) 𝐸𝑛𝑔𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥 = 𝑏𝑒𝑡𝑎 + 𝑔𝑎𝑚𝑚𝑎 𝑎𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎 + 𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑡𝑎 

As the numerator (waves associated with active 

processing) increases, engagement index increases, and as 

the denominator (waves associated with idleness and 

daydreaming) increases, engagement index decreases. 

While each mode reflected varying trends in individual 

brainwaves, overall engagement-related EEG metrics 

showed no significant differences across all three modes 

(Tutor, Solver, Collaborator) and between AI vs. no-AI. 

## XV.  DISCUSSION 

This study should be interpreted as a pilot exploratory 

investigation rather than a definitive test of neural 

mechanisms. The behavioral data provides the strongest 

evidence right now, while the use of a consumer-grade 

EEG headset and absence of statistically significant 

spectral differences limit causal interpretation. 

Consequently, the electrophysiological findings are best 

viewed as descriptive trends that complement the 

behavioral results and serve as a way to inform hypotheses 

for future studies using higher-density neurophysiological 

recordings. 

The behavioral evidence suggests that AI interaction types can produce statistically significant differences in behavior 

depending on the mode. However, Tutor and Collaborator 

mode demonstrated similar Initiation behaviors. For 

Processing and Stress indications, Tutor mode revealed the 

most Processing behavior but also the most Stress. Solver 

mode promoted the least Stress and the lowest Processing 

and Initiation. 

The lack of statistical significance in EEG data (p > .29) 

suggests that AI interaction mode does not create massive 

drops or increases in cognitive activity. However, the 

non-significant EEG results should be interpreted 

cautiously. Rather than proving that AI interaction has no 

neurological effect, the current findings indicate that this 

study did not detect large group-level changes in frontal 

EEG spectral power under the present experimental 

conditions. Future work using higher-density EEG, 

improved artifact control, and larger samples would be 

needed to evaluate more subtle neural effects. 

While the headset used presents a limitation in the data 

collected, it also highlights the value of this work as a 

low-cost, thus scalable study able to be integrated into 

school environments without major disruption to a

student’s normal work setting. By providing this early 

framework, the experimental method can be replicated in 

various educational settings. 

EEG data revealed descriptively different activity 

corresponding with each AI mode. These visual data points 

could inspire further investigation into the mechanisms 

behind these responses. Researchers could even explore 

how different interaction types could potentially lead to 

specific effects like cognitive offloading and cognitive load 

[21][23]. 

This study also introduces a new investigation into AI’s 

short-term carryover effect, which previously has not been 

researched extensively. Descriptively lower levels of beta 

and gamma were observed in no-AI conditions. The 

possibility of AI’s association with increased reliance on an 

external source should be explored with future large-scale 

experiments, but currently reveals no significant effect. 

The engagement index findings displayed no significant 

difference in “engagement” (measured based on the ratio 

between beta + gamma brainwaves and alpha + theta 

brainwaves) regardless of the task. The metric used to 

calculate “engagement” may be oversimplified but was 

utilized as part of this exploratory study. Future studies 

could explore this further, as well as if the brain engages 

the same amount regardless of AI use but shifts to a 

different cognitive strategy. 

## XVI.  CONSTRAINTS 

1. As participants moved to the later questions, a potential 

mental fatigue (characterized by descriptive increases in 

delta activity) emerged. As this may have affected the 

accuracy of our results, future studies should test each AI 

mode individually from each other by providing a 1-minute 

break between each type of task block. 

## FIGURE 9.  Delta-oscillations between quiz questions 

2. Each person had varying focus levels in the quiz, so 

variations between participants had a greater effect on the 

overall data. We controlled for this by having each 

participant take the quiz two times (Quiz A and Quiz B), 

but for future studies, it would be advisable to test a larger 

number of participants. 

3. The EEG headset used had limited spatial coverage, 

which may have affected the accuracy of our data due to its 

inability to pick up strong oscillations from other regions 

of the brain beyond the front. Additionally, it was 

susceptible to contamination without a high-level filter to 

account for noise. To reduce the amount of artifacts in our 

data, we used simple data processing techniques such as 

the interquartile reduction method and a simple moving 

average, but were unable to perform targeted reduction 

techniques that require more equipment. While neural 

differences across modes had a p-value > 0.29, descriptive 

patterns emerged. However, in the future, it is advisable for 

studies to use a full-coverage spatial headset and 

accordingly, higher levels of data processing in order to 

ensure full validity of results. 

4. Lastly, we cannot interpret the gamma increase as 

definitive evidence of higher-level cognitive processing. 

While gamma-band oscillations are frequently associated 

with attention and information integration, their 

interpretation remains largely context-dependent [9]. One 

such potential confounding variable is a

transcription-related motor artifact effect resulting from the 

gamma wave’s sensitivity to active, high-precision physical 

execution (fast-paced writing) combined with sensory 

feedback. Because elevated gamma-band oscillations 

(31–40 Hz) are highly sensitive to micro-muscular 

artifacts, rather than reflecting purely internalized 

comprehension or cognitive enhancement, gamma 

increases may partially reflect sensorimotor integration 

demands (e.g., head moving, pencil strokes). Future 

iterations of this experiment should decouple processing from active writing phases. 

## XVII.  NEW IMPLICATIONS ON AI BRAIN RESEARCH 

To our knowledge, this is one of the first studies to 

experimentally test the unique modes of Tutor, Solver, and 

Collaborator when analyzing how AI use affects brain 

waves in teenagers. By breaking down the previously 

generalized “AI interaction” into three distinct use cases, 

we were able to find preliminary evidence that AI modality 

may influence short-term cognitive engagement patterns in 

high school learners. 

For the purpose of this relatively new concept, unique 

quizzes were created to be used in the context of high 

school students. In both Quiz A and Quiz B, the math, 

writing, and innovation questions developed were based on 

standardized high school exams like the Scholastic 

Assessment Test (SAT). 

We were able to find behavioral cues that participants were 

exhibiting across each mode, such as: 

● How many seconds participants took to try the 

question independently prior to AI help as a Tutor 

vs. Solver vs. Collaborator 

● How many times participants paused to process 

the AI’s response 

● How many times the students showed signs of 

stress when evaluating AI’s response (identified 

three markers of common behavior when using 

AI) [see Figure 4] 

By implementing our unique parallel quiz structure across 

all 48 participants (Quiz A and Quiz B), our study was also 

the first (to our knowledge) to explore carryover effects of 

AI use on high school students across all three AI modes 

defined. From a neuroscience perspective, this highlights 

the importance of examining not only immediate neural 

responses but also residual effects that shape ongoing 

cognitive function. From an engineering perspective, this 

shapes how AI models are developed to mitigate carryover 

effects during interaction. 

## XVIII.  FIELD IMPACTS 

This study develops a preliminary framework for 

examining artificial intelligence interaction as a set of 

distinct cognitive interaction modes rather than the binary 

AI versus no-AI conditions. While most existing research 

evaluates AI exposure as a single construct, the present 

findings suggest that Tutor, Collaborator, and Solver 

interactions may be associated with different behavioral 

profiles and descriptive electrophysiological patterns. 

Although no statistically significant global EEG 

differences were observed across modes, the behavioral 

findings and mode-specific oscillatory trends indicate that 

future investigations may benefit from treating AI 

interaction style as an independent experimental variable 

rather than aggregating all AI use into a single category. 

Beyond the specific findings reported here, the study 

introduces a methodology that combines controlled AI 

prompting, behavioral observation, and EEG monitoring 

within an educational context. This framework may 

provide a foundation for future research seeking to 

characterize how different forms of human-AI interaction 

relate to engagement, problem-solving behavior, and 

learning processes. 

The behavioral metrics developed in this study, including 

Initiation, Processing, and Stress, may also serve as 

candidate variables for future adaptive educational 

systems. Rather than assuming a fixed interaction strategy, 

future systems could investigate whether AI assistance can 

be dynamically adjusted according to observed user 

behavior. However, evaluating the effectiveness of such 

adaptive approaches will require further experimental 

validation. 

Finally, the results highlight the importance of examining 

not only immediate responses to AI interaction but also 

potential short-term carryover effects. While the present 

findings should be interpreted solely as exploratory, they 

suggest that temporal dynamics may represent an 

additional dimension of human-AI interaction worthy of 

future investigation. 

Taken together, this work provides an initial experimental 

framework for studying mode-dependent AI interaction in 

high school learners. By suggesting that AI’s cognitive 

impact is mode-dependent and has the potential to create 

changes at both the neural and behavioral levels, this study 

lays the foundation for future research aimed at optimizing 

student–AI collaboration for sustained critical thinking and 

focus. 

## XIX.  FUTURE WORK 

As this study explores a largely new concept in 

electroencephalography, there are three key facets that this 

research should be improved upon in the future. 

1. The first is to test a larger demographic of people to 

expand generalizability. While restricting the sample to 

bilingual individuals with a 4.0+ weighted GPA enabled 

tighter control over neurolinguistic and educational 

variability, it also limited the extent to which findings can 

be extrapolated to broader student populations. Proper 

implications of these findings worldwide would require 

reproducing the methodology across students of all 

learning levels to determine whether the observed neural 

and behavioral patterns remain consistent or exhibit population-specific and culture-dependent variation. 

2. The second is to examine long-term exposure in 

participants through a longitudinal study. The 30-minute 

session performed for all 48 participants illuminated 

distinct short-term effects across each mode. However, 

another aspect one must not forget is tracing how the 

correct usage of AI modes affects students over multiple 

years. Understanding these trajectories is essential for 

determining whether the AI modes identified serve as a 

scaffold for sustaining long-term cognition or eventually 

end up showcasing different effects in long-term cognitive 

capacity. 

3. A third direction for future testing, and a particularly 

interesting one, is to test children with differing attention 

patterns, such as children with ADHD 

(Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder) and ASD 

(Autism Spectrum Disorder). These groups often exhibit 

differences in attentional regulation and executive 

functioning, which may meaningfully alter AI interaction 

across modes at both behavioral and neural levels. Testing 

such populations would not only improve inclusivity but 

also provide insight into whether the unique oscillatory 

patterns resulting from the study can be adapted to support 

neurodivergent learners. 

## XX.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

K. Khurana and A. Liew would like to thank Dr. Yu Meng 

and Professor Shouyi Wang for their review of our research 

methodology and guidance with scientifically interpreting 

study conclusions. 

## XXI.  REFERENCES 

[1] S. Wang, X. Tao, H. Ma, F. Li, and C. Wu, "EEG assessment of 

artificial intelligence-generated content impact on student creative 

performance and neurophysiological states in product design," Front. 

Psychol., vol. 16, 2025, doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1508383. 

[2] N. Kosmyna et al., "Project publications: Your brain on ChatGPT," 

MIT Media Lab, 2025. [Online]. Available: 

http://www.media.mit.edu/projects/your-brain-on-chatgpt/publications/ 

[3] I. C. Peláez-Sánchez, D. Velarde-Camaqui, and L. D. 

Glasserman-Morales, "The impact of large language models on higher 

education: Exploring the connection between AI and education 4.0," 

Front. Educ., vol. 9, 2024, doi: 10.3389/feduc.2024.1392091. 

[4] V. Jurcak, D. Tsuzuki, and I. Dan, "10–20, 10–10, and 10–5 systems 

revisited: Their validity as estimates of regional cerebral locations," 

NeuroImage, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1600–1611, Feb. 2007. 

[5] E. K. S. Louis, L. C. Frey, et al., "The Normal EEG," American 

Epilepsy Society, 2016. [Online]. Available: 

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK390343/ 

[6] A. Widmann, E. Schröger, and B. Maess, "Digital filter design for 

electrophysiological data – a practical approach," J. Neurosci. Methods, 

vol. 250, pp. 34–46, Sep. 2015. 

[7] M. X. Cohen, Analyzing Neural Time Series Data: Theory and 

Practice. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2014. 

[8] E. K. S. Louis et al., "Appendix 3: Principles of electrical safety," in 

The Normal EEG. American Epilepsy Society, 2016. [Online]. Available: 

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK390355/ 

[9] MNE-Python, "Overview of MEG/EEG analysis with MNE-Python." 

[Online]. Available: 

https://mne.tools/stable/auto_Tutorials/intro/10_overview.html 

[10] C. S. Nayak and A. C. Anilkumar, "EEG normal waveforms," 

StatPearls, Mar. 24, 2019. [Online]. Available: 

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK539805/ 

[11] W. Klimesch, "EEG alpha and theta oscillations reflect cognitive and 

memory performance: A review and analysis," Brain Research Reviews, 

vol. 29, no. 2–3, pp. 169–195, Apr. 1999. 

[12] W. J. Ray and H. W. Cole, "EEG alpha and beta activity during 

cognitive tasks and component states," Science, vol. 228, no. 4700, pp. 

750–752, May 1985. 

[13] E. Tan et al., "Theta activity and cognitive functioning: Integrating 

evidence from task-related developmental EEG research," Dev. Cogn. 

Neurosci., vol. 67, p. 101404, Jun. 2024. 

[14] C. S. Herrmann, H. Strüber, D. Helfrich, and A. K. Engel, "EEG 

gamma oscillations: From Kilohertz-activity to cognitive magnitudes," 

Cortex, vol. 62, pp. 25–40, Jan. 2015. 

[15] R. T. Canolty and R. T. Knight, "The functional role of 

cross-frequency coupling," Trends Cogn. Sci., vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 

506–515, Nov. 2010. 

[16] D. Hagemann and E. Naumann, "The effects of ocular artifacts on 

(lateralized) broadband power in the EEG," Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 112, 

no. 2, pp. 215–231, Feb. 2001. 

[17] J. Cohen, “Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences,” 

2nd ed. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1988. 

[18] A. M. Pendry, J. M. Vandagriff, C. H. Y. Wang, K. A. Gee, and E. K. 

Carr, “Behavior Coding of Adolescent and Therapy Dog Interactions 

During a Social Stress Task,” Veterinary Sciences, vol. 11, no. 12, p. 644, 

2024. 

[19] M. Friedman, "The use of ranks to avoid the assumption of normality 

implicit in the analysis of variance," Journal of the American Statistical 

Association, vol. 32, no. 200, pp. 675–701, Dec. 1937. 

[20] F. Wilcoxon, "Individual comparisons by ranking methods," 

Biometrics Bulletin, vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 80–83, Dec. 1945. 

[21] J. Sweller, "Cognitive load during problem solving: Effects on 

learning," Cogn. Sci., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 257–285, Apr. 1988. 

[22] A. T. Pope, E. H. Bogart, and D. S. Bartolome, "Biocybernetic 

system evaluates indices of operator engagement in automated task," Biol. 

Psychol., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 187–195, 1995. 

[23] E. F. Risko and S. J. Gilbert, "Cognitive offloading," Trends in Cogn. 

Sci., vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 676–688, Sep. 2016. KASHIKA KHURANA was born in Panchkula, 

India, in 2009. She will receive her honors high 

school diploma through Allen High School in 

Allen, TX, USA, in May 2027. 

Kashika’s research experience is centered around 

using technology and artificial intelligence to aid 

human health. She has conducted neuroscience, 

educational, and gut-brain axis research, all 

incorporating statistical and computational 

approaches to accelerate intervention. 

Khurana has presented her work at multiple 

competitive venues, including the Dallas Science 

and Engineering Fair (2025, 2026), the Texas Science and Engineering Fair 

(2026), and was selected for the MIT App Inventor Global AI Summit (2026), 

where her projects were recognized for their innovation and interdisciplinary 

approach, combining behavioral health with rigorous engineering methodology. 

ALLY LIEW was born in Irving, TX, USA, in 

2008. She is pursuing her high school education at 

Allen High School, Allen, TX, USA, and is 

expected to graduate in May 2027. Her academic 

focus includes science research and 

interdisciplinary studies. 

She has participated in independent research and 

competitive science programs. In March 2026, she 

was recognized as a finalist at the Texas Science 

and Engineering Fair, and was selected for the 

MIT App Inventor Global AI Summit in May 

2026. Her current research interests include neuroscience, behavioral analysis, 

and interdisciplinary problem-solving. 

Liew continues to engage in academic and research-oriented activities and 

plans to pursue advanced study in a STEM-related field.