Title: An Integrated EEG, TMS-EEG and Behavioural Dataset for Investigating the Neural Correlates of Working Memory

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
An Integrated EEG, TMS-EEG and Behavioural Dataset for Investigating the Neural Correlates of Working Memory 

Mana Biabani a, Alex Fornito a, Sarah Thompson a, Ziarih Hawi a, Murat Yucel a, b , Mark A. Bellgrove 

> a

, Nigel C. Rogasch a, c, d 

a.  Turner Institute for Brain and Mental Health, School of Psychological Sciences, Monash University, Australia 

b.  QIMR Berghofer, Brisbane, Australia 

c.  School of Biomedicine, University of Adelaide, Australia 

d.  Lifelong Health, South Australian Health, and Medical Research Institute (SAHMRI), Adelaide, Australia 

Working memory is a fundamental process that underlies cognition. Accordingly, the neural mechanisms that support working memory performance are of great interest in cognitive neuroscience. We present a publicly accessible dataset comprising 123 healthy adults (mean age = 28.58 years, SD = 7.56; age range = 18–46 years; 75 females) to facilitate investigation of the neural mechanisms underlying working memory performance in humans. Across two days of assessment, participants underwent a battery of cognitive tasks assessing working memory and other cognitive domains (day 1), followed by 62-channel EEG recordings (day 2). EEG data were acquired at rest, during a visual working memory task, and following single-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS-EEG) targeting key brain regions involved in working memory. This article provides a detailed overview of the study design, methodology, and data characteristics. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Table 1. Overview of experimental design, modalities, and variables. 

Design Type (s)  ● Within-subject design 

Measurement Type (s)  ● Brain measurements 

● Behaviour measurements 

Technology Type (s)  ● Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 

● Electroencephalography (EEG) 

● Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) 

Demographic and Experimental Variable (S)  ● Age 

● Sex 

● Education 

● Smoker Status 

● EEG Cap Size 

● Distance from Screen during Task 

● Resting Motor Threshold (rMT) 

● Stimulation Intensity 

● Stimulation Coordinates (x, y, z) 

● Stimulation Condition Order 

● Coil-to-Cortex Distance 

● Rate of Sensory Perception during TMS 

● Volume of White Noise during TMS 

● Digitized Electrode Positions 

Sample Characteristic (s)  ● Young healthy individuals 

● Brain 

Background and summary 

Working memory is a fundamental cognitive function that supports a broad range of higher order 

processes such as reasoning, emotional regulation, and social behaviour  (Baddeley, 2012; Cowan, 

2014) . Visual working memory (VWM), the ability to hold and manipulate visual information over 

short periods, plays a critical role in cognitive function. Differences in VWM capacity account for over 40% of the variance in cognitive ability across both healthy individuals and those with cognitive 

impairments (e.g., schizophrenia and advanced age)  (Luck and Vogel, 2013) . Remarkably, this 

cognitive construct can be accurately assessed using simple tasks like recalling coloured squares. Evidence shows that memory for such basic stimuli is highly predictive of broader cognitive abilities 

and is often disrupted in various neuropathological conditions  (D’Esposito and Postle, 2015; Kahana 

and Wagner, 2024) . The simplicity of VWM tasks makes them ideal for neuroimaging experiments 

and computational modeling, offering valuable insights into complex cognitive processes, and advancing our understanding of brain function. Human brain imaging studies using methods such as structural and functional MRI have consistently highlighted frontoparietal brain regions that are 

associated with VWM performance  (Jonides et al., 2008; D’Esposito and Postle, 2015) . However, the 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

precise neurophysiological mechanisms and dynamic neural interactions that govern cognitive performance across these regions remain underexplored. 

Electroencephalography (EEG) non-invasively captures neural activity from across the scalp with high temporal precision. Studies using EEG have revealed key neural correlates of VWM capacity including: modulation of theta (4-7 Hz), alpha (8-12 Hz), beta (15-30 Hz) and gamma (>30 Hz) band 

oscillations  (Roux and Uhlhaas, 2014; Miller et al., 2018; Pavlov and Kotchoubey, 2022) ; long-range 

synchronisation of oscillations between regions  (Fell and Axmacher, 2011) ; nested coupling of 

oscillations such as theta-gamma coupling  (Lisman and Jensen, 2013) ; modulation of non-oscillatory 

activity  (Voytek et al., 2015; Donoghue et al., 2020) ; and sustained, slow-wave event-related 

potentials (ERPs) such as contralateral delay activity  (Fukuda et al., 2015; Luria et al., 2016; Bae and 

Luck, 2018) . However, several key questions remain. First, it is unclear whether the EEG mechanisms 

recorded during a specific task generalise to broader measures of working memory performance and other cognitive domains. One approach to address this question is to model the latent structure of working memory performance using a battery of behavioural tasks (e.g., using structural equation modelling) and then correlate this latent variable with the EEG measure of interest. While this approach has proven useful for assessing the relationship between certain EEG measures and working 

memory performance  (Unsworth et al., 2015; Lenartowicz et al., 2021) , a challenge is the large 

populations required for this approach (usually at least 100 participants). Therefore, large datasets containing both EEG measures and broad batteries of cognitive tasks are required. 

A second limitation is that the spatial resolution of EEG restricts its ability to localize the neural mechanisms underlying working memory to specific cortical regions. To address this limitation, transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) can be combined with EEG to non-invasively stimulate cortical regions of interest and record the resulting TMS-evoked potentials (TEPs). When applied while participants are at rest, TEPs provide unique insights into the reactivity, excitation/inhibition balance, oscillatory profile, and functional connectivity of the targeted cortical region, thereby advancing our understanding of both localized cortical function and large-scale connectivity 

(Ilmoniemi et al., 1997; Massimini et al., 2005; Tremblay et al., 2019) . Furthermore, certain TEP 

features from specific cortical regions have been linked with working memory performance in healthy 

individuals  (Rogasch et al., 2015)  and those with brain disorders  (Ferrarelli et al., 2012) . Despite the 

significant advantages, TMS-EEG faces crucial challenges such as high inter-individual variability 

and various artifacts that can distort the signal of interest  (Biabani et al., 2019, 2024; Tremblay et al., 

2019; Hernandez-Pavon et al., 2023; Ziemann et al., 2026) . To mitigate these issues, there is a 

growing call for increased data sharing of large open-access TMS-EEG datasets with rigorous 

experimental controls to enhance the reproducibility of TMS-EEG research  (Belardinelli et al., 2019; 

Siebner et al., 2019) .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The present dataset (Table 1) offers a unique resource including a large sample of healthy adults (n = 123) with EEG measured at rest, during a working memory task, and following single pulse TMS targeting three regions important for working memory (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, premotor cortex, and parietal cortex) as well as a sensory control condition (shoulder stimulation). Participants also completed a battery of cognitive behavioural tests assessing working memory, response inhibition, and processing speed. We foresee many possible uses for this dataset including deep phenotyping of resting and active EEG signals to identify neural correlates of cognition, testing and optimising cleaning pipelines for EEG and TMS-EEG data, and providing a benchmark dataset for biophysical models of human neural activity at rest, during working memory and following TMS. In sum, we provide a rich, high-quality, multimodal human EEG dataset with accompanying cognitive behavioural tasks and unique concurrent TMS-EEG data. This resource will allow for reproducible investigation of neural dynamics underlying working memory with high transparency and precision. 

Methods 

Ethics approval 

The research project was approved by the Monash University Human Research Ethics Committee (MUHREC), reference number 12723. The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. 

Participants 

A total of 123 healthy adults (mean age = 28.58 years, SD = 7.56; age range = 18–46 years; 75 females) were tested for this study. Participants were recruited from other imaging studies run by our research group (the Genetics of Cognition [GOC] and Monash Brain Behaviour Project [MBBP]) and from the general population. Returning participants of earlier imaging studies who had consented to being contacted about future research studies were invited to participate in the current study via email. New participants were either recruited through offline advertisements at Monash University Clayton Campus, local businesses, libraries and community centres, or through online advertisements on marketing websites, social media and the university recruitment portal. Participants were initially phone screened for contraindications to TMS and MRI, colour blindness, ethnicity, and history of medical and psychiatric disorders (see Table 2). Informed consent was then obtained from participants in-person, after reading a written statement about the study and receiving a verbal explanation upon attendance. All participants consented for their de-identified data to be shared on public data repositories for use in future research. Participants were remunerated 100 AUD upon study completion. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Table 2. Exclusion criteria. 

Experimental design 

Data were collected between April 2018 and December 2020 at Monash Biomedical Imaging (MBI), Clayton Campus, Melbourne, Australia. Pre-existing datasets from the GOC (imaging and genetic) and MBBP (cognitive, imaging and genetic) incorporated into the study in accordance with ethical guidelines were collected between February 2014 - August 2017 and September 2018 - December 2020, respectively. An overview of study procedure is listed in Table 3. 

New participants completed two assessment sessions, totalling 5-6 hours. Day 1 involved MRI data collection for newly recruited individuals, alongside cognitive and genetic assessments (i.e., saliva sample). Day 2 included EEG data collection both at rest and during task performance, as well as TMS-EEG recordings at rest. Note that data from MRI and genetic assessments are not included in the present dataset. 

Exclusion criteria 

● History of adverse reactions to transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) 

● Presence of surgical implants (e.g., metal in the brain or neck, pacemakers, implanted neurostimulators, intracardiac lines, medication infusion devices, cochlear implants) 

● Pregnancy 

● Diagnosis of a neurological disorder (e.g., epilepsy, stroke) 

● History of neurosurgery or head injury (associated with loss of consciousness or occurring on more than two occasions) 

● History of convulsions or seizures 

● First-degree relative diagnosed with epilepsy 

● History of frequent or severe headaches 

● Diagnosis of tinnitus or hearing problems 

● History of fainting, particularly during medical procedures 

● Current use of psychoactive medications with potential interactions with TMS 

● Excessive alcohol consumption (>10-12 drinks per week) 

● Recreational drug use more than once per week 

● Diagnosis of color blindness 

● Non-Caucasian ethnicity (less than four grandparents of European descent - required for genetic assessments not included in the current data) 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Table 3. Data acquisition procedure. 

Days  Assessments  Details  Number of Participants  Core Cognitive Domain 

Day 0  Telephone screening (Participant enrolment) 

Inclusion  123  —

Day 1  MRI  T1-weighted (MPRAGE)  123  —

Cognitive Test Battery  Bar Task 

Colour Task 

Orientation Task 

120 

121 

122 

Working Memory (Change Detection) 

Working Memory (Change Detection) 

Working Memory (Continuous Recall) 

Symmetry Span 

Operation Span 

120 

117 

Working Memory (Complex Span) 

Working Memory (Complex Span) 

Backwards Digit Span 

2-back Task 

Symbol Search 

118 

117 

120 

Working memory (Complex Span) 

Working memory (Updating and Monitoring) 

Processing Speed 

Go/No-Go  117  Response Inhibition 

Stop-Signal Task  122  Response Inhibition 

Simon Task  113  Response Inhibition 

Day 2  EEG-Rest  Resting state (8 mins)  121  —

EEG-Task  Colour wheel task  117  Working Memory (Continuous Recall) 

TMS  Resting motor threshold (RMT)  123  —

TMS–EEG  Prefrontal stimulation  122  —

Premotor stimulation  123  —

Parietal stimulation  123  —

Control stimulation  120  —SESSION 1 

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 

MRI data were acquired on a Siemens 3T Skyra scanner (Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, Germany). T1-weighted images were acquired using a magnetization-prepared 2 rapid-acquisition gradient-echoes (MP2RAGE) sequence (TR = 5000 ms, TE = 2.98 ms, TI1/TI2 = 700/2500 ms, 1.0 mm isotropic voxel size). MRI was primarily used to guide the position of the TMS coil using stereotaxic neuronavigation. 

Cognitive Assessment 

Cognitive Test Battery. All cognitive battery tasks were administered electronically by trained research staff and students following standardised procedures. Testing was conducted on a 12.5 inch 

laptop using Inquisit 5 (Millisecond Software), PsychoPy2  (Peirce, 2007)  or Matlab (The MathWorks 

Inc., 2017b). Each task started with a brief practice version to ensure familiarisation. Newly recruited participants completed the full test battery on day 1, while returning participants undertook an abbreviated version consisting of the remaining tasks which were not completed in previous studies. Tasks were selected to sample cognitive domains commonly distinguished in latent-variable models of working memory and executive function, including working memory storage capacity (change detection/visual array/continuous recall tasks: Bar Task, Colour Task, Orientation Task), working memory storage capacity with distraction (complex span tasks: Symmetry Span, Operation Span, Backwards Digit Span), working memory updating (n-back task), processing speed (Symbol Search 

Task), and inhibitory control (Go/No-Go Task, Stop-Signal Task, Simon Task)  (Engle et al., 1999; 

Miyake et al., 2000; McAuley and White, 2011) .

Working Memory Storage Capacity 

Bar Task (BRT) 

The Bar Task (fig. 1a) is a change-detection working memory task implemented in MATLAB, adapted 

from standard visual working memory paradigms  (Luck and Vogel, 1997) . For this task, participants 

were presented with sets of oriented ( −45°, 0°, 45°, 180°) coloured (red or blue) bars displayed for 100 ms. After a 900 ms delay, a second array appeared, and participants indicated whether any bar had changed orientation or colour by pressing the Z key (“change”) or M key (“no change”) on the keyboard. Each trial was separated by a 200 ms inter-trial interval (ITI). The task comprised 40 trials per condition (4 and 6 loads), yielding 80 total trials (50% change, 50% no change). 

Variables recorded: stimulus and probe features (orientation, colour, load), change condition, participant responses, RT. 

Colour Task (CLT) 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The Colour Task (fig. 1b)  (Luck and Vogel, 1997)  is a change detection WM paradigm implemented 

in PsychoPy2. Participants were required to remember the colour and location of a set of coloured squares (500 ms presentation) and indicate whether a subsequent array (1000 ms later) was identical (by pressing the ‘M’ key) or changed (by pressing the ‘Z’ key), with a 500 ms ITI. The task included 13 trials per condition (2-, 4-, and 6-item loads; 42 total trials). 

Variables recorded: number of items (set size), original stimulus colour, probe stimulus colour, change presence, participant response, correctness, and RT. 

Orientation Task (ORT) 

The Orientation Task (fig. 1c)  (Sperling, 1960)  was a partial-report WM paradigm implemented in 

MATLAB 2017b . Participants were required to remember the location and orientation of two or four black-and-white circular Gabor patches presented on a grey background (500 ms presentation, 1000 ms retention time) and then reproduce the orientation of a cued target patch using a keypad. The task included 30 trials per condition (2-, 4-item load; 60 total trials). 

Variables recorded: load condition, target orientation, and orientation error. 

Working Memory Storage Capacity with Distraction 

Symmetry Span (SYM) 

The Symmetry Span task (fig. 1e)  (Conway et al., 2005)  is a visuospatial complex span measure of 

working memory capacity and was implemented using Inquisit 5 . Participants were required to memorize the spatial sequence of red squares presented sequentially within a 4×4 grid while, on alternating trials, making judgments about the symmetry of a pattern of black squares displayed in an 8×8 grid. During each distractor trial, participants indicated whether the black-square pattern was vertically symmetric (“YES”/“NO”) before recalling the red-square sequence in the order of its presentation. The task included 12 trials per condition with two, three or five red squares presented in each. 

Variables recorded: task phase (show-square, recall-square, show-symmetry, solve-symmetry), load condition (set size), spatial location of squares, recalled square sequence, symmetry stimulus, ground-truth symmetry (symmetrical/asymmetrical), participant response (true/false or grid selection), and RT. 

Operation Span (OPN) 

The Operation Span Task (fig. 1d)  (Conway et al., 2005)  is a complex paradigm that evaluates WM 

capacity under dual-task demands and was implemented in Inquisit 5 . Participants were required to remember a series of alphabetical letters presented for later recall, between alternating trials where they were required to make judgements about the accuracy of answers to mathematical equations. Singular letters (T, L, Q, N, F, H, Y, S, P, K, R, J) appeared in black font on a grey background (1000 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

ms), which participants were required to later recall in order of appearance by clicking on the letters in the response screen (500 ms interval). During the distractor task, participants were required to evaluate the accuracy of an answer to a mathematical sum by clicking ‘TRUE’ or ‘FALSE’ (5000 ms time out). The task included three trials per load condition (2-7 items) in ascending difficulty (15 total trials). 

Variables recorded: task phase (show ‑letter, recall ‑letter, show ‑math, solve ‑math), load condition (set size), letter identity, recalled letter sequence, mathematical problem, ground ‑truth answer (true/false), participant decision (true/false), correctness, and RT. 

Backwards Digit Span (BDS) 

The Backwards Digit Span task (fig. 1f)  (Woods et al., 2011a)  was administered in Inquisit 5 to assess 

sequence recall. Participants were presented with individual digits (1 s each, black font on white background) and instructed to recall the sequence in reverse order by clicking on-screen digits. Sequence length adaptively increased or decreased depending on participant performance (range = 2–16 digits, 14 total trials). 

Variables recorded: Backward digit span (maximum sequence length correctly recalled), number of correct trials, number of trials preceding two consecutive errors, and predicted performance score. 

Working Memory Updating 

2-Back Task (NBT) 

The 2-back working memory task (fig. 1g), based on standard n-back paradigms  (Fantz, 1958) , was 

implemented in PsychoPy2 . Participants were presented a continuous stream of uppercase letters (A–J) presented centrally in white on a black background and instructed to press the down arrow key whenever the current letter matched the one presented two trials earlier. The task contained 130 total trials, including 31 target trials (24%). Each stimulus remained onscreen for 1 s with a fixed ISI of 0.5 s. 

Variables recorded: probe letter identity, response, correctness, and RT. 

Processing Speed 

Symbol Search (SBS) 

The Symbol Search task (fig. 1k)  (Wechsler, 2003)  was administered using Inquisit 5 to measure 

perceptual speed and visual scanning efficiency. Participants were required to scan rows of characters to determine whether target symbols presented at the start of each row appeared within the search array. Responses were made by clicking on the present character or the “No” button. Stimuli were presented in black font, with target symbols displayed on a grey background and search symbols on a light blue background. Each page contained 10 rows, and participants were given a 2-minute time limit to complete the task. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Variables recorded: correctness, total correct sum, and RT. 

Inhibitory Control 

Go/No-Go (GNG) 

The Go/No-Go task (fig. 1i)  (Verbruggen and Logan, 2008)  assessed inhibitory control and was 

administered using Inquisit 5 . Participants were shown letters (“X”, “W”, “Y”, or “Z”) in black on white background and instructed to respond to “W”, “Y”, or “Z” by pressing the spacebar while withholding responses to “X”. Target letters were presented for up to 750 ms, and trials were separated by a 500-ms ISI displaying a fixation cross (+). The task comprised 50 trials per condition (250 total). 

Variables recorded: correctness, commission errors, omission errors, and RT. 

Stop Signal Task (SST) 

The Stop Signal Task (fig. 1h), a well-established measure of inhibitory control  (Logan and Cowan, 

1984; Verbruggen et al., 2019) , was administered using Inquisit 5 . Participants were required to 

respond to left- and right- facing arrows that appeared on the screen one at a time, by quickly pressing the ‘D’ and ‘L’ keys, respectively, except when a tone signalled them to withhold their response. The stop-signal  delay  (SSD), which was defined as the interval between the disappearance of the target discrimination cue (arrow) and the onset of the  stop-signal, was initially set at 250 ms and adjusted by ±50 ms based on performance (range: 50–115 ms). The task comprised three consecutive blocks of 64 trials [192 in total] and lasted approximately 9 min on average. 

Variables recorded: RT, stop-signal delay, correctness, and successful inhibitions. 

Simon Task (SMT) 

The Simon Task (fig. 1j)  (Simon and Wolf, 1963; Bialystok et al., 2004)  measured response inhibition 

and was administered using Inquisit 5 . In this task, participants were required to quickly respond to red or blue squares presented on the left or right side of the screen by pressing ‘A’ (blue) or ‘L’ (red) key. Prior to the appearance of each square, a fixation cross appeared for 800 ms, followed by a 250 ms blank interval. Then the stimulus square was presented for 1000 ms or until a response was made followed by a 500 ms ITI (100 total trials). 

Variables recorded: stimulus–response congruency, stimulus colour, stimulus position, response correctness, and RT. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 1. The cognitive battery tasks. (a–k) Representative task structures for each paradigm, illustrating the sequence of events within trials: (a) Bar Task, (b) Colour Task, (c) Orientation Task, (d) Symmetry Span, (e) Operation Span, (f) Backwards Digit Span, (g) n-back task, (h) Symbol Search Task, (i) Go/No-Go Task, (j) Stop-Signal Task, (k) Simon Task. 

SESSION 2 

EEG and TMS-EEG session 

All participants were seated in a comfortable chair and requested to remain relaxed, with their eyes open and fixated on the screen ahead. Following preparation of the EEG cap, EEG was recorded at rest (8 mins), and then during 4 blocks of the working memory task. The motor hotspot was then determined using TMS and the resting motor threshold determined. Blocks of single pulse TMS were then applied across four conditions (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, premotor cortex, posterior parietal cortex, shoulder), the order of which was pseudorandomised across participants. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

EEG 

EEG activity was recorded with a SynAmps 2 EEG system (Neuroscan, Compumedics, Australia) from 62 TMS-compatible Ag/AgCl-sintered disk electrodes arranged according to the 10-20 international system in an elastic cap (EASYCAP, Germany). EEG recordings were online-referenced to FPz and grounded to AFz, with electrode placement co-registered to individual structural MRI scans and recorded in real-space using a neuronavigation system (Brainsight^TM2, Rogue Research Inc., Canada). EEG signals were amplified by 1000, low-pass filtered (DC-2000 Hz) and sampled at a rate of 10 kHz. Curry 8 (Neuroscan, Compumedics, Australia) was used to record EEG for offline analysis whilst maintaining skin electrode impedance <5 kΩ. 

Resting-state EEG 

Participants were instructed to remain relaxed, focused ahead with eyes open and to think of nothing in particular while resting-state EEG was recorded (8 mins). The length of resting-state recording was determined to approximately match the time required for each TMS-EEG data collection block (approx ~8 mins). 

EEG during WM task 

The Continuous Recall Task (fig. 2)  (Suchow et al., 2013)  is a partial-report WM task administered 

using Matlab 2017b with concurrent EEG. Participants were presented with a group of coloured squares (2, 4, 6) on a grey background (500 ms, 1000 ms interval) before being prompted to recall the colour of the singular outlined square presented on the next screen by clicking on its position on the colour wheel. There were 100 trials per condition (2, 4, 6) divided into 4 blocks (75 trials per block) (300 total trials). 

Variables recorded: Target colour and its degree, non-target colour and its degree, reported colour and its degree, and trial load. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 2. Example display from The Continuous Recall Working Memory Task. Adapted from 

(Virtue-Griffiths et al., 2025) , under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 

License (CC BY 4.0). 

EMG 

Electromyographic (EMG) activity was measured with bipolar surface Ag-AgCl electrodes (4 mm) placed on the right first dorsal interosseous (FDI) muscle in a belly-tendon montage (2 cm distance), grounded at the right-hand dorsum. EMG signals were amplified by 1000, band-pass filtered (10-1000 Hz), sampled at a rate of 5 kHz, epoched around the TMS pulse (-300 to 500 ms) and displayed online on the computer screen. 

TMS 

TMS was administered using a Magventure CB60 figure-of-eight coil attached to a MagPro X100 with Option stimulator (MagVenture, Denmark). The stimulator was controlled via the MAGIC 

toolbox  (Habibollahi Saatlou et al., 2018)  to deliver biphasic pulses to the cortex in an 

anterior-posterior and posterior-anterior direction. A stereotactic neuronavigation system was used to guide coil placement on the basis of individual neuroanatomy (Brainsight, Rogue Research, Montreal, QC, Canada). First, resting motor threshold (RMT) was determined by: 1) finding the motor ‘hotspot’ defined as the coil position over left primary motor cortex resulting in the largest motor evoked potentials in right FDI muscle, and 2) finding the minimum intensity to elicit a motor evoked potential >0.05 mV in at least 5/10 trials while wearing the EEG cap. Next, four blocks of stimuli were delivered targeting four different locations: 3 cortical and 1 control (shoulder) location. In total, 120 pulses were delivered with 4 - 6s jittered inter-pulse intervals per block. Targeted cortical regions were within the left hemisphere and included the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (x = -46, y = 33, z = 34; Brodmann area 9), premotor cortex (x = -23, y = 4, z = 63; Brodmann area 6) and posterior parietal cortex (x = -26, y = -69, z = 63; Brodmann area 7). Stimulation sites were chosen to overlay peaks in haemodynamic activity identified following a meta-analysis of 1091 fMRI studies assessing 

working memory generated by Neurosynth  (Yarkoni et al., 2011) . The target coordinates were 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

adjusted for each individual to ensure positioning of the coil over the crown of the nearest gyrus. Coil placement for cortical stimulation was tangential to the left side of the head, with the coil handle positioned at an approximate 90-degree angle to the underlying gyrus. Small additional adjustments to coil angle were made to minimise sensation of the pulse on the scalp via feedback from the participants. Stimulation intensity was determined by calculating the RMT adjusted for differences in 

coil-to-cortex distance (RMT adj ) for each site  (Stokes et al., 2005, 2007) . RMT adj was calculated at 

each location by: 1) calculating the distance between the centre of the coil and the target location on the cortex (in mm); 2) multiplying the distance by a scaling factor of 2.8; and 3) adding the value to the RMT. The first 94 participants received TMS at 100% RMT adj , while the final 29 received TMS at 120% RMT adj . The initial stimulation intensity of 100% RMT adj was chosen for consistency with studies targeting the motor cortex which used this intensity to minimise sensory input associated with stimulation. However, stimulation intensity was adjusted for the last 29 participants following preliminary analyses which indicated a higher signal-to-noise ratio for TMS-evoked potentials when using higher TMS intensities. A control condition was also incorporated to mimic auditory and somatosensory effects elicited by TMS, where 120 pulses were delivered to the left acromioclavicular 

joint over the shoulder  (Herring et al., 2015; Biabani et al., 2019) . Coil positioning and intensity for 

shoulder stimulation was modified relative to participants’ reported comparisons of local sensations produced by the TMS coil at the strongest cortical site. Coil angle and orientation was further modified according to visual inspection and participant feedback to reduce pulse transmission down the arm and hand. Stimulation order between blocks was pseudo randomised for each participant. 

Additional control measures were implemented during stimulation to further minimise multisensory 

effects of TMS which were considered effective at the time the experiments commenced  (Ilmoniemi 

et al., 2015) . A thin sheet of foam (~3 mm) was attached to the underside of the coil to reduce sensory 

input from coil vibration and bone conduction, while white noise was played through earphones to minimise auditory activation from the acoustics of the TMS click. White noise volume was increased to a level where stimulation was no longer perceivable to participants or their upper threshold of comfort for acoustic stimuli was reached. Following each block of stimulation, participants completed four questions on a 10-point Likert scale rating the sensory experiences of stimulation including: 

1) How uncomfortable were the TMS pulses? 

2) If painful, how intense was the pain from the TMS pulses? 

3) If there were any twitches, how strong were the muscle twitches from the TMS pulse? 

4) How well did the white noise cover the sound of the TMS pulse? 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Despite the sensory masking process, the majority of participants reported that they were still able to distinguish the clicking sound and scalp sensation while receiving stimulation, particularly for 

stimulation sites in the frontal cortex  (Biabani et al., 2024) .

EEG pre-processing 

Prior to public release, EEG data were partially pre-processed in MATLAB (R2023a, The 

MathWorks, USA) using EEGLAB  (Delorme and Makeig, 2004)  and TESA  (Rogasch et al., 2017)  to 

reduce file size. All working-memory EEG blocks were concatenated into a single dataset for each participant. For continuous TMS-EEG recordings, the TMS pulse artefact was removed (−1 to 5 ms) and then reconstructed via cubic interpolation. All EEG datasets were then down-sampled to 1000 Hz. 

MRI data is not publicly available as part of this dataset. This is due to reasons including public release not being stated as the intent of MRI data use at the time of collection for prior studies, as well 

as concerns of confidentiality in the ability to reverse defaced NIFTI images  (Schwarz et al., 2021; 

Clunie et al., 2025; Gao et al., 2025) .

Data Record 

The data can be accessed from the OpenNeuro public repository (access number: ds008037). This 

OpenNeuro release is organised according to the Brain Imaging Data Structure standard  (Gorgolewski 

et al., 2016) , including the EEG-BIDS extension  (Pernet et al., 2019) , and the emerging 

NIBS-BIDS/BEP037 recommendations  (Bertazzoli et al., 2026) , where applicable. 

Technical Validation 

Datasets were manually checked for missing or corrupt data prior to their inclusion into the database. Subsequent quality checks were done on the EEG and behavioural data as follows: 

Resting-state EEG data quality 

The quality of resting-state EEG data was evaluated by examining the spectral characteristics of the recordings. We first preprocessed the data using an automated cleaning pipeline (Reduction of 

Electroencephalographic Artifacts (RELAX)  (Bailey et al., 2022, 2023) ) implemented within 

EEGLAB  (Delorme and Makeig, 2004) . Briefly, data were bandstop (47–53 Hz) and bandpass 

(0.25–80 Hz) filtered using zero-phase Butterworth filters. Noisy channels were then identified and 

removed using the PREP pipeline  (Bigdely-Shamlo et al., 2015) , followed by two rounds of 

multi-channel Wiener filtering (MWF) to reduce eye-movement, muscle, and drift-related artefacts. 

Residual artefacts were identified using the ICLabel  independent component analysis  (ICA) classifier 

(Pion-Tonachini et al., 2019)  and the artifactual components were subsequently attenuated using 

wavelet-enhanced ICA (wICA) implemented with the FastICA symmetric algorithm. Rejected electrodes were interpolated using spherical interpolation and the data were re-referenced to the 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

common average. Final cleaned datasets were retained as continuous EEG data for subsequent analyses. The power spectral density (PSD) was estimated for each individual and each channel using Welch’s method. Group-level spectra showed an expected 1/f like decay across frequencies with a clear peak in alpha range (around 10 Hz; fig. 3A). The alpha power was maximal around occipitoparietal regions, consistent with the well-established neurophysiological pattern observed at 

rest  (Jensen and Mazaheri, 2010) ; fig. 3B). We also examined the integrity of channel-level data 

across individuals and frequencies and observed broadly homogeneous power distributions across participants (fig. 3C). There was no evidence of systematically noisy or flat channels, or globally abnormal recordings, indicating stable signal quality across the dataset. 

Figure 3. Quality assessment of resting-state EEG data. (A) Mean spectral power of EEG signals recorded at occipito-parietal regions (O1, Oz, O2, POz, Pz), showing the 1/f-like decay with a pronounced peak at alpha band (8-12 Hz). (B) Spatial distribution of alpha power centred around occipito-parietal regions. (C) Channel-by-participant heatmap of broadband power spectrum (1–45 Hz), indicating consistent signal quality across participants and channels, with only minor and localized deviations, and no evidence of systematic corrupted recordings. 

WM data quality (EEG and performance) 

The quality of task-EEG data was assessed via visualisation of time-locked responses and channel-level signal characteristic. The raw recordings underwent the same cleaning procedure as the resting state data. Subsequently, grand-average event-related potentials (ERPs) were computed separately for each working memory load condition (2, 4, 6) and visualised at selected regions known 

to contribute to the neural dynamics of VWM (Prefrontal-F3; Premotor-FC1; Parietal-P3;  (Miller and 

Cohen, 2001; Curtis and D’Esposito, 2003; Todd and Marois, 2004; Harrison and Tong, 2009) . We 

found canonical time-locked components in the signals which were showing systematic modulation by task load indicative of physiologically meaningful neural activity (fig. 4A). To examine the integrity of the recorded signals across channels and participants, we visualised the root-mean-square 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

(RMS) of the amplitude using a heatmap (fig. 4B). Overall, the recorded potentials were consistent across the dataset, with no indication of systematically flat or excessively noisy channels or any global abnormality. 

For the quality control of performance data we examined the distribution of recall errors (difference 

between reported and target colours) and their sensitivity to the difficulty of the task (set size)  (Zhang 

and Luck, 2008; Suchow et al., 2013) . The recall errors increased with set size, consistent with the 

expected load-dependent constraints on working memory precision (fig. 4D). The signed recall errors (-180° to 180°) showed bell-shape distribution peaking around the target colour indicating unbiased and systematic response (fig. 4D). The overall absolute errors (0 to 180°) were also well below the ~90° expected under random responding and tightly clustered across individuals (fig. 4E). Although one participant showed elevated condition-specific errors exceeding the benchmark (sub-012; set-size 2, 90.83°; set-size 4, 96.53°; Fig. 4C). The present assessments confirm the stability and interpretability of both EEG and performance datasets for further analyses. 

Figure 4. Quality assessment of the Visual working memory EEG and task performance data. 

(A) Grand average ERPs (mean ± SEM) recorded at Prefrontal (F3), Premotor (FC1), and Parietal (P3) regions at the three task loads. All ERPs exhibit clear canonical components with region-specific and load-sensitive behaviour. (B) Channel-by-participant heatmap of RMS amplitude showing little evidence for excessive noise. (C) Distribution of mean absolute recall error across participants at the three task loads confirming sensitivity of performance to task difficulty. (D) Histogram plots showing the distribution of signed recall errors (-180° to 180°) across trials. The clustered values around 0° (indicative of the target colour being chosen) argues against randomness of the responses. (E) The 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

average of absolute recall error across loads showing normal distribution, which supports a biological behavior inside the population. Circles inside violin plots represent values for each individual. 

TMS-EEG data quality 

The interpretability and suitability of the TMS–EEG data have been established in our recent work 

(Biabani et al., 2024) . TMS–EEG data were preprocessed using the validated pipeline described in 

(Rogasch et al., 2014, 2017)  and detailed in  (Biabani et al., 2019) . Briefly, data from all conditions 

were concatenated to ensure identical preprocessing across conditions and underwent epoching around the TMS pulse (−1000 to 1000 ms), baseline correction (−500 to −10 ms), removal of the TMS pulse artefact (−2 to 15 ms) followed by cubic interpolation, and downsampling to 1000 Hz. Data were then visually inspected for artefacts, and TMS-induced muscle and decay artefacts were removed using FastICA. This was followed by band-pass (1–100 Hz) and band-stop (48–52 Hz) filtering using a zero-phase Butterworth filter (order = 4), and a second ICA to remove residual artefacts (e.g., eye blinks, channel noise). Finally, rejected channels were spherically interpolated, and 

the data were re-referenced to the common average. Figure 5 (adapted from  (Biabani et al., 2024) )

illustrates the characteristics of the processed TEPs to both high (120% RMT adj ) and low (100% RMT adj ) stimulation intensities. As shown, TMS at both intensities produced clear canonical peaks in EEG recordings whose magnitude varied as a function of stimulation condition. Consistent with the TMS-EEG literature, early responses (<60 ms) showed site-specific spatiotemporal variation, whereas later peaks (N100/P200), exhibited a broader frontocentral topography, consistent with sensory 

evoked potentials  (Freedberg et al., 2020; Rogasch et al., 2020; Ahn and Fröhlich, 2021) .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 5. Spatiotemporal distribution of TMS-evoked potentials showing canonical components 

and condition sensitivity (adapted from  (Biabani et al., 2024) , under the terms of the Creative 

Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)). (A-B) TEPs following high intensity stimulation (120% RMT adj ; n= 29). (C-D) TEPs following low intensity stimulation (100% RMT adj ; n= 94). (A, C) Temporal pattern of group-average TEPs recorded at each electrode. The highlighted trace in the butterfly plot and the corresponding electrode on the scalp map denote representative electrodes for each condition (Prefrontal: F3; Premotor: FC1; Parietal: P3; Control: CZ). Grey vertical bars indicate interpolated time windows excluded from analysis. (B–D) Topographical maps show the scalp distribution of potentials at representative TEP peak latencies. 

Cognitive Test Battery Data 

For the quality check of the cognitive battery data we examined response distributions and task-specific performance signatures to ensure data consistency and interpretability. 

The change detection tasks were evaluated to determine whether they meaningfully challenged working memory storage capacity. For the Bar and Colour tasks we quantified sensitivity by calculating d’ value , which is the ability of an individual to distinguish between a signal (stimulus) 

and noise (no stimulus)  (Stanislaw and Todorov, 1999) . In both tasks the majority of participants 

showed d’ > 0 across loads confirming the ability to distinguish signals from noise (fig. 6A,C). Consistently, the level of accuracy was reliably above chance (50%) for most participants in both tasks and decreased with task difficulty (fig. 6B,D). The quality of orientation task data were checked based on the distribution of recall errors. As depicted in Figure 6F, the median absolute error values were low, tightly distributed across individuals at low values (<30°) and consistently increased with task difficulty. Overall, the quality check of the detection tasks data, confirm consistent recalls across 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

participants and good task engagement with little evidence of random responding or performance heterogeneity. 

Figure 6. Quality assessment of the Change Detection task performance data. (A-B) Bar task performance. Sensitivity (d′; A) and accuracy (B) are shown separately for memory loads 4 and 6. Performance was reliably above chance (d′ = 0; accuracy = 50%, dashed line), without ceiling effects, and decreased with increasing load. (C-D) Colour change detection task. Sensitivity (d′; C) and accuracy (D) are shown for loads 2, 4, and 6. Performance remained above chance across all loads and decreased systematically with increasing set size. (E–F) Orientation reproduction task. Median absolute error increased with load (E). Histogram of participant-level median absolute error (F) showing unimodal distribution centred at low values. Circles inside violin plots represent values for each individual. 

For the Symmetry Span and Operation Span tasks, we evaluated the data based on both memory and processing components of the paradigms. For the Symmetry Span task we first quantified the memory performance using a partial-credit item score, defined as the proportion of square locations recalled in 

the correct serial position for each memory set  (Conway et al., 2005) . We observed lower accuracy 

and greater variability at larger set sizes (Fig. 7A), indicating that the task manipulation increased visuospatial working-memory demands. 

Furthermore, accuracy on the symmetry-judgement task generally exceeded the quality-control 

threshold (85% accuracy  (Conway et al., 2005) ) confirming the engagement of the participants in the 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

concurrent processing task (fig. 7B). Together, these results demonstrate the expected behavioural profile of a complex span task: load-dependent reductions in spatial recall alongside reliable concurrent-task engagement. 

Operation span task performance was assessed using both partial-credit  (Conway et al., 2005)  and 

absolute recall measures, together with accuracy on the concurrent mathematical verification task (fig. 7B). Partial-credit recall by load showed a systematic effect of memory load, with near-ceiling recall at lower loads (2-3) and a gradual decline in partial-credit performance as load increased (5-7). As 

expected  (Conway et al., 2005) , individual variability increased with load and the scores moved 

towards a normal distribution. This confirms that the task successfully challenged the executive attention and cognitive control of a wide range of working memory capacity. These quality assessments were supplemented by symmetry judgement accuracy, which exceeded the commonly-used 85% benchmark, confirming reliable engagement with the processing component of the task . 

For the Backward Digit Span task, we examined the load-dependency of the performance as well as the distribution of the participant-level span estimates (fig. 7C). As shown, the error counts increased with sequence length indicating that the task became progressively more challenging as working-memory demands increased. Performance variability increased with sequence length likely reflecting the smaller number of trials/participants reaching those levels of difficulty. The estimated 

span values show coherent distribution within the expected range for healthy adults  (Woods et al., 

2011b) , with no evidence for marked floor or ceiling effects. Overall, these findings confirm the 

interpretability of the present dataset for measuring working-memory capacity. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 7. Quality assessment of complex span task performance. (A) Symmetry Span task: the upper plot illustrates partial-credit spatial recall performance by set size, and the lower plot represents the distribution of accuracy on the concurrent symmetry-judgement task. (B) Operation Span task: the upper violin plots depict the mean number of items recalled in the correct serial position across loads, and the lower plot shows the distribution of accuracy on the concurrent mathematical verification task. Dashed lines (A-B; lower plots) indicate the 85% accuracy benchmark for the concurrent processing components of the span tasks. (C) Backward Digit Span task: the upper line graph plots the mean±SEM recall error count across span lengths, and the lower violin plot shows the distribution of estimated span values. Violin plots show participant-level distributions with each dot representing an individual participant. 

For working memory updating (n-back) and processing speed (Symbol Search) tasks, we first looked at the distribution of median RTs to identify any implausible or extreme response patterns. For both tasks, RT distributions were unimodal and fell within plausible ranges for the respective paradigms 

(n-back task : ~0.45-0.65 s  (Hautus et al., 2021) ; Symbol Search task: ~2-4 s  (Wechsler, 1955; 

Salthouse, 1996) ), with no evidence for anticipatory or random responding (i.e., excessively fast 

responses)(fig. 8A,C). To evaluate task engagement, we evaluated d′ for the n-back task and found the values above chance (0) confirming reliable discrimination between target and non-targets (fig. 8B). For the Symbol Search task, we examined the distribution of total correct responses and found a unimodal distribution with no evidence of ceiling or floor effects (no clustering near maximum or minimum values)(fig. 8D). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 8. Quality assessment of the N-back and Symbol Search task performance data. (A-B) The distribution of response time (Median RT; A) and sensitivity (d′; B) for the N-back task. (C-D) The distribution of response time from correct trials (Median RT; C) and accuracy (Total correct score; D) for the Symbol Search task. RTs were unimodally distributed and fell within a plausible range for the respective paradigms. Sensitivity values ( d’ ) were consistently above chance (d′ = 0; dashed line). Total correct scores in the Symbol Search task showed a unimodal distribution without floor or ceiling effects. 

To assess the data from the Go/No-Go task we compared the accuracy of responses between Go and No-Go trials (fig. 9A). Consistent with the expected inhibitory demands, we found less accuracy in 

No-Go trials, where participants must withhold a prepotent response  (Verbruggen and Logan, 2008; 

Wright et al., 2014) . Moreover, response time values on correct Go trials fell within the 

several-hundred millisecond range commonly reported in healthy young adult Go/No-Go paradigms 

(Wright et al., 2014) . For the Stop-Signal task, we first evaluated whether the behavioural data follow 

the assumptions of the independent race model  (Verbruggen et al., 2019) . As expected, responses on 

failed-stop trials were faster than those on Go trials, indicating that failed inhibitions primarily occurred when the go process finished before the stop process. We also evaluated whether the adaptive staircase procedure effectively calibrated the difficulty of the task across participants (fig. 9B). Importantly, Stop success rates centred around 50% confirming that the task was well-calibrated 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

to generate valid inhibition data  (Verbruggen et al., 2013) . In the Simon task (fig. 9C), participants 

demonstrated consistently high accuracy across both congruent and incongruent trials (with higher accuracy for the congruent trials, as expected), which confirms their engagement with the task. To assess the presence of Simon interference effect, we compared the response times between congruent and incongruent trials. As expected, responses were slower on incongruent trials indicating a positive 

Simon effect across participants  (Simon and Rudell, 1967) . Together, the observed patterns across the 

inhibitory-control tasks data indicate that these tasks elicited the expected demands on response inhibition, as well as, response-conflict processing supporting the suitability of the data for subsequent analyses. 

Figure 9. Quality assessment of inhibitory control task performance. (A) Go/No-Go task: the upper plot compares response accuracy between Go and No-Go trials, and the lower plot shows the distribution of response times on correct Go trials. (B) Stop-Signal task: the upper plot compares response times for Go trials and failed-stop trials, and the lower plot shows stop success rates. The horizontal dashed line indicates the 50% target expected from the adaptive staircase procedure. (C) Simon task: the upper plot compares accuracy between congruent and incongruent trials. The lower plot shows the Simon effect (positive; slower response in incongruent trials). The dashed line indicates no Simon effect. Violin plots show participant-level distributions with each dot representing an individual participant. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Data Availability 

The dataset described in this Data Descriptor is available from OpenNeuro under accession number 

ds008037 [doi:10.18112/openneuro.ds008037.v1.0.0 ]. The repository contains the de-identified 

behavioural, EEG, and TMS–EEG data organised according to the Brain Imaging Data Structure (BIDS), together with the associated metadata files required to interpret the dataset. 

Code Availability 

Open-source code for the data-processing pipelines and quality-control procedures associated with 

this dataset is available at :  https://github.com/ManaBiabani/GWM_dataset_processing_QC .

Acknowledgements 

This research was supported by the Australian Research Council (ARC) DP170100738 (NCR, AF, ZH, MY), DE180100741 (NCR) and FT210100694 (NCR). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

References 

Ahn S, Fröhlich F (2021) Pinging the brain with transcranial magnetic stimulation reveals cortical 

reactivity in time and space. Brain Stimulat 14:304–315. 

Baddeley A (2012) Working Memory: Theories, Models, and Controversies. Annu Rev Psychol 

63:1–29. 

Bae G-Y, Luck SJ (2018) Dissociable Decoding of Spatial Attention and Working Memory from EEG 

Oscillations and Sustained Potentials. J Neurosci 38:409–422. 

Bailey N, Biabani M, Hill AT, Miljevic A, Rogasch NC, McQueen B, Murphy OW, Fitzgerald P 

(2022) Introducing RELAX (the Reduction of Electroencephalographic Artifacts): A fully 

automated pre-processing pipeline for cleaning EEG data-Part 1: Algorithm and Application 

to Oscillations. BioRxiv:2022–03. 

Bailey N, Hill A, Biabani M, Murphy OW, Rogasch NC, McQueen B, Miljevic A, Fitzgerald P (2023) 

RELAX part 2: A fully automated EEG data cleaning algorithm that is applicable to 

Event-Related-Potentials. Clin Neurophysiol 149:202–222. 

Belardinelli P et al. (2019) Reproducibility in TMS–EEG studies: A call for data sharing, standard 

procedures and effective experimental control. Brain Stimul Basic Transl Clin Res 

Neuromodulation 12:787–790. 

Bertazzoli G et al. (2026) NIBS-BIDS: an extension to the brain imaging data structure for 

non-invasive brain stimulation. Available at: https://zenodo.org/doi/10.5281/zenodo.19322569 

[Accessed June 29, 2026]. 

Biabani M, Fornito A, Goldsworthy M, Thompson S, Graetz L, Semmler JG, Opie GM, Bellgrove 

MA, Rogasch NC (2024) Characterising the contribution of auditory and somatosensory 

inputs to TMS-evoked potentials following stimulation of prefrontal, premotor, and parietal 

cortex. Imaging Neurosci 2:imag–2–00349. 

Biabani M, Fornito A, Mutanen TP, Morrow J, Rogasch NC (2019) Characterizing and minimizing 

the contribution of sensory inputs to TMS-evoked potentials. Brain Stimulat 12:1537–1552. 

Bialystok E, Craik FIM, Klein R, Viswanathan M (2004) Bilingualism, Aging, and Cognitive Control: 

Evidence From the Simon Task. Psychol Aging 19:290–303. 

Bigdely-Shamlo N, Mullen T, Kothe C, Su K-M, Robbins KA (2015) The PREP pipeline: 

standardized preprocessing for large-scale EEG analysis. Front Neuroinformatics 9:16. 

Clunie DA, Flanders A, Taylor A, Erickson B, Bialecki B, Brundage D, Gutman D, Prior F, Seibert 

JA, Perry J (2025) Report of the Medical Image De-Identification (MIDI) task group--best 

practices and recommendations. Arxiv:arXiv-2303. 

Conway ARA, Kane MJ, Bunting MF, Hambrick DZ, Wilhelm O, Engle RW (2005) Working memory 

span tasks: A methodological review and user’s guide. Psychon Bull Rev 12:769–786. 

Cowan N (2014) Working Memory Underpins Cognitive Development, Learning, and Education. 

Educ Psychol Rev 26:197–223. 

Curtis CE, D’Esposito M (2003) Persistent activity in the prefrontal cortex during working memory. 

Trends Cogn Sci 7:415–423. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Delorme A, Makeig S (2004) EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG 

dynamics including independent component analysis. J Neurosci Methods 134:9–21. 

D’Esposito M, Postle BR (2015) The Cognitive Neuroscience of Working Memory. Annu Rev 

Psychol 66:115–142. 

Donoghue T, Haller M, Peterson EJ, Varma P, Sebastian P, Gao R, Noto T, Lara AH, Wallis JD, 

Knight RT, Shestyuk A, Voytek B (2020) Parameterizing neural power spectra into periodic 

and aperiodic components. Nat Neurosci 23:1655–1665. 

Engle RW, Tuholski SW, Laughlin JE, Conway AR (1999) Working memory, short-term memory, and 

general fluid intelligence: a latent-variable approach. J Exp Psychol Gen 128:309. 

Fantz RL (1958) Pattern vision in young infants. Psychol Rec 8:43–47. 

Fell J, Axmacher N (2011) The role of phase synchronization in memory processes. Nat Rev Neurosci 

12:105–118. 

Ferrarelli F, Sarasso S, Guller Y, Riedner BA, Peterson MJ, Bellesi M, Massimini M, Postle BR, 

Tononi G (2012) Reduced natural oscillatory frequency of frontal thalamo-cortical circuits in 

schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 69:766–774. 

Freedberg M, Reeves JA, Hussain SJ, Zaghloul KA, Wassermann EM (2020) Identifying site-and 

stimulation-specific TMS-evoked EEG potentials using a quantitative cosine similarity 

metric. Plos One 15:e0216185. 

Fukuda K, Mance I, Vogel EK (2015) α Power Modulation and Event-Related Slow Wave Provide 

Dissociable Correlates of Visual Working Memory. J Neurosci 35:14009–14016. 

Gao C, Xu K, Kim ME, Zuo L, Li Z, Archer DB, Hohman TJ, Moore AZ, Ferrucci L, Beason-Held 

LL (2025) Pitfalls of defacing whole-head MRI: re-identification risk with diffusion models 

and compromised research potential. Comput Biol Med 197:111112. 

Gorgolewski KJ et al. (2016) The brain imaging data structure, a format for organizing and describing 

outputs of neuroimaging experiments. Sci Data 3:160044. 

Habibollahi Saatlou F, Rogasch NC, McNair NA, Biabani M, Pillen SD, Marshall TR, Bergmann TO 

(2018) MAGIC: An open-source MATLAB toolbox for external control of transcranial 

magnetic stimulation devices. Brain Stimulat 11:1189–1191. 

Harrison SA, Tong F (2009) Decoding reveals the contents of visual working memory in early visual 

areas. Nature 458:632–635. 

Hautus MJ, Macmillan NA, Creelman CD (2021) Detection theory: A user’s guide. Routledge. 

Hernandez-Pavon JC et al. (2023) TMS combined with EEG: Recommendations and open issues for 

data collection and analysis. Brain Stimul Basic Transl Clin Res Neuromodulation 

16:567–593. 

Herring JD, Thut G, Jensen O, Bergmann TO (2015) Attention modulates TMS-locked alpha 

oscillations in the visual cortex. J Neurosci 35:14435–14447. 

Ilmoniemi RJ, Hernandez-Pavon JC, Mäkelä NN, Metsomaa J, Mutanen TP, Stenroos M, Sarvas J 

(2015) Dealing with artifacts in TMS-evoked EEG. In, pp 230–233. IEEE. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Ilmoniemi RJ, Virtanen J, Ruohonen J, Karhu J, Aronen HJ, Näätänen R, Katila T (1997) Neuronal 

responses to magnetic stimulation reveal cortical reactivity and connectivity. NeuroReport 

8:3537. 

Jensen O, Mazaheri A (2010) Shaping functional architecture by oscillatory alpha activity: gating by 

inhibition. Front Hum Neurosci 4:186. 

Jonides J, Lewis RL, Nee DE, Lustig CA, Berman MG, Moore KS (2008) The Mind and Brain of 

Short-Term Memory. Annu Rev Psychol 59:193–224. 

Kahana MJ, Wagner AD (2024) The Oxford Handbook of Human Memory, Two Volume Pack: 

Foundations and Applications. Oxford University Press. 

Lenartowicz A, Truong H, Enriquez KD, Webster J, Pochon J-B, Rissman J, Bearden CE, Loo SK, 

Bilder RM (2021) Neurocognitive subprocesses of working memory performance. Cogn 

Affect Behav Neurosci 21:1130–1152. 

Lisman JE, Jensen O (2013) The Theta-Gamma Neural Code. Neuron 77:1002–1016. 

Logan GD, Cowan WB (1984) On the ability to inhibit thought and action: A theory of an act of 

control. Psychol Rev 91:295–327. 

Luck SJ, Vogel EK (1997) The capacity of visual working memory for features and conjunctions. 

Nature 390:279–281. 

Luck SJ, Vogel EK (2013) Visual Working Memory Capacity: From Psychophysics and Neurobiology 

to Individual Differences. Trends Cogn Sci 17:391–400. 

Luria R, Balaban H, Awh E, Vogel EK (2016) The contralateral delay activity as a neural measure of 

visual working memory. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 62:100–108. 

Massimini M, Ferrarelli F, Huber R, Esser SK, Singh H, Tononi G (2005) Breakdown of Cortical 

Effective Connectivity During Sleep. Science 309:2228–2232. 

McAuley T, White DA (2011) A latent variables examination of processing speed, response 

inhibition, and working memory during typical development. J Exp Child Psychol 

108:453–468. 

Miller EK, Cohen JD (2001) An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function. Annu Rev Neurosci 

24:167–202. 

Miller EK, Lundqvist M, Bastos AM (2018) Working Memory 2.0. Neuron 100:463–475. 

Miyake A, Friedman NP, Emerson MJ, Witzki AH, Howerter A, Wager TD (2000) The unity and 

diversity of executive functions and their contributions to complex “frontal lobe” tasks: A 

latent variable analysis. Cognit Psychol 41:49–100. 

Pavlov YG, Kotchoubey B (2022) Oscillatory brain activity and maintenance of verbal and visual 

working memory: A systematic review. Psychophysiology 59:e13735. 

Peirce JW (2007) PsychoPy—Psychophysics software in Python. J Neurosci Methods 162:8–13. 

Pernet CR, Appelhoff S, Gorgolewski KJ, Flandin G, Phillips C, Delorme A, Oostenveld R (2019) 

EEG-BIDS, an extension to the brain imaging data structure for electroencephalography. Sci 

Data 6:103. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Pion-Tonachini L, Kreutz-Delgado K, Makeig S (2019) ICLabel: An automated 

electroencephalographic independent component classifier, dataset, and website. NeuroImage 

198:181–197. 

Rogasch NC, Daskalakis ZJ, Fitzgerald PB (2015) Cortical inhibition of distinct mechanisms in the 

dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is related to working memory performance: A TMS–EEG study. 

Cortex 64:68–77. 

Rogasch NC, Sullivan C, Thomson RH, Rose NS, Bailey NW, Fitzgerald PB, Farzan F, 

Hernandez-Pavon JC (2017) Analysing concurrent transcranial magnetic stimulation and 

electroencephalographic data: A review and introduction to the open-source TESA software. 

Neuroimage 147:934–951. 

Rogasch NC, Thomson RH, Farzan F, Fitzgibbon BM, Bailey NW, Hernandez-Pavon JC, Daskalakis 

ZJ, Fitzgerald PB (2014) Removing artefacts from TMS-EEG recordings using independent 

component analysis: importance for assessing prefrontal and motor cortex network properties. 

Neuroimage 101:425–439. 

Rogasch NC, Zipser C, Darmani G, Mutanen TP, Biabani M, Zrenner C, Desideri D, Belardinelli P, 

Müller-Dahlhaus F, Ziemann U (2020) The effects of NMDA receptor blockade on 

TMS-evoked EEG potentials from prefrontal and parietal cortex. Sci Rep 10:3168. 

Roux F, Uhlhaas PJ (2014) Working memory and neural oscillations: alpha–gamma versus 

theta–gamma codes for distinct WM information? Trends Cogn Sci 18:16–25. 

Salthouse TA (1996) The processing-speed theory of adult age differences in cognition. Psychol Rev 

103:403. 

Schwarz C, Kremers W, Wiste H, Gunter J, Vemuri P, Spychalla A, Kantarci K, Schultz A, Sperling 

R, Knopman D (2021) Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging I. Changing the face of 

neuroimaging research: Comparing a new MRI de-facing technique with popular alternatives. 

Neuroimage 231:117845. 

Siebner HR, Conde V, Tomasevic L, Thielscher A, Bergmann TO (2019) Distilling the essence of 

TMS-evoked EEG potentials (TEPs): A call for securing mechanistic specificity and 

experimental rigor. Brain Stimulat 12:1051–1054. 

Simon JR, Wolf JD (1963) CHOICE REACTION TIME AS A FUNCTION OF ANGULAR 

STIMULUS-RESPONSE CORRESPONDENCE AND AGE. Ergonomics 6:99–105. 

Sperling G (1960) The information available in brief visual presentations. Psychol Monogr Gen Appl 

74:1–29. 

Stanislaw H, Todorov N (1999) Calculation of signal detection theory measures. Behav Res Methods 

Instrum Comput 31:137–149. 

Stokes MG, Chambers CD, Gould IC, English T, McNaught E, McDonald O, Mattingley JB (2007) 

Distance-adjusted motor threshold for transcranial magnetic stimulation. Clin Neurophysiol 

118:1617–1625. 

Stokes MG, Chambers CD, Gould IC, Henderson TR, Janko NE, Allen NB, Mattingley JB (2005) 

Simple metric for scaling motor threshold based on scalp-cortex distance: application to 

studies using transcranial magnetic stimulation. J Neurophysiol 94:4520–4527. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738085 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Suchow JW, Brady TF, Fougnie D, Alvarez GA (2013) Modeling visual working memory with the 

MemToolbox. J Vis 13:9–9. 

Todd JJ, Marois R (2004) Capacity limit of visual short-term memory in human posterior parietal 

cortex. Nature 428:751–754. 

Tremblay S et al. (2019) Clinical utility and prospective of TMS–EEG. Clin Neurophysiol 

130:802–844. 

Unsworth N, Fukuda K, Awh E, Vogel EK (2015) Working Memory Delay Activity Predicts 

Individual Differences in Cognitive Abilities. J Cogn Neurosci 27:853–865. 

Verbruggen F et al. (2019) A consensus guide to capturing the ability to inhibit actions and impulsive 

behaviors in the stop-signal task. eLife 8:e46323. 

Verbruggen F, Chambers CD, Logan GD (2013) Fictitious Inhibitory Differences: How Skewness and 

Slowing Distort the Estimation of Stopping Latencies. Psychol Sci 24:352–362. 

Verbruggen F, Logan GD (2008) Response inhibition in the stop-signal paradigm. Trends Cogn Sci 

12:418–424. 

Virtue-Griffiths S, Fornito A, Thompson SC, Biabani M, Tiego J, Thapa T, Bailey NW, Rogasch NC 

(2025) Task-related changes in aperiodic activity are related to visual working memory 

capacity independent of event-related potentials and alpha oscillations. Imaging Neurosci 

3:IMAG-a. 

Voytek B, Kramer MA, Case J, Lepage KQ, Tempesta ZR, Knight RT, Gazzaley A (2015) 

Age-Related Changes in 1/f Neural Electrophysiological Noise. J Neurosci 35:13257–13265. 

Wechsler D (1955) Wechsler adult intelligence scale--. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 

Wechsler D (2003) Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children—Fourth Edition (WISC-IV), 4th ed. San 

Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation. 

Wright L, Lipszyc J, Dupuis A, Thayapararajah SW, Schachar R (2014) Response inhibition and 

psychopathology: a meta-analysis of go/no-go task performance. J Abnorm Psychol 123:429. 

Zhang W, Luck SJ (2008) Discrete fixed-resolution representations in visual working memory. Nature 

453:233–235. 

Ziemann U et al. (2026) Clinical utility and prospective of TMS-EEG: Updated review from an 

international expert group. Clin Neurophysiol Off J Int Fed Clin Neurophysiol 184:2111487.